ZERO TO SOLD
HOW TO START, RUN, AND SELL A BOOTSTRAPPED
BUSINESS
ARVID KAHL
Copyright © 2020 by Arvid Kahl
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means,
including information storage and retrieval systems, without written permission from the author,
except for the use of brief quotations in a book review.
ISBN: 978-3-9821957-0-4 (Print)
ISBN: 978-3-9821957-1-1 (eBook)
ISBN: 978-3-9821957-2-8 (ePDF)
Version 1.2.1 (June 25th, 2020)
For Danielle, my one person.
I wouldn’t be who and where I am without you.
CONTENTS
An Introduction to Zero to Sold
On Bootstrapping
The FeedbackPanda Story
What Is Bootstrapping?
The Four Stages of a Bootstrapped Business
The Preparation Stage
The Preparation Stage and You
From Idea to Product
From Idea to Product
You Probably Have It Backwards: Starting a Bootstrapped Business
Step One: Your Audience
Bootstrapping an Audience
The Power of the Niche
Deciding on a Market for Your Business
Determining the Size of a Market
Step Two: Their Problem
Identifying a Critical Problem: Working on the Right Thing
Identifying the Most Critical Problem in a Market
Problem Validation: Talking to the Right Peoplle
Step Three: Your Solution
A Solutions Isn’t a Product… Yet
Solution Validation Doesn’t Happen in a Vacuum: Talking to Your Future
Customers
Asking the Right Questions: Focus on Problems not Solutions
Step Four: Your Product
It’s Time to Get Your Hands Dirty
The Myth of the Finished Product
The Do’s and Don’ts of the Minimum Viable Product
How to Release as a Bootstrapper: Often, Early, and Safely
The Boring Truth of Successful Products that Survive
Not in House: Reinventing the Wheel
Making Tech Choices: Don’t Add Risk to a Risky Business
From Product to Business
A Well-Oiled Machine
Forget Goals, Create Systems: Foundations of a Sustainable Business
Your Initial Pricing Will Never Be Right, but Try Anyway
Do You Need a Co-Founder?
The Survival Stage
The Survival Stage and You
Mental Health: It’s Not Optional
Why Your Mental Health Matters
Real and Imaginary Responsibilities of a Bootstrapped Founder
Product Evolution: Controlled Growth and Saying No
Building a Product Under Constraints
Building the Right Things
The Evolution of the “What”
First Things First: Feature Prioritization Frameworks
Build for Value, Not for Applause: Product Management Under Heavy
Constraints
Building Things Right
The Evolution of the “How”
Abstractions
Flexible Architecture
Customers: Building Relationships that Last
Why Relationships Matter: Maximum Customer Service with Minimum Effort
You May Be Barking up the Wrong Tree: Re-Evaluating Your Audience
Churn, Retention, and Revenue: What Makes Customers Stick Around and Why
That’s Important
Pricing: Subscriptions, Plans, and Other Financial Challenges
Pricing Is Not Set in Stone: Strategies for Determining Product Value
Not All Subscribers Are Equal: Dealing With Plans That No Longer Work
Not All Subscriptions Are Equal: Offering Yearly Plans From the Start
Seller Beware: Pricing Models That Can Break Your Business
Business: Pulling Levers and Adjusting Screws
Make the Product Sell Itself: Referral Systems
Surviving a Recession as a Bootstrapped Business
Marketing and Sales
Spreading the Word: Marketing on a Shoestring Budget
Selling as a Bootstrapper: Beware of the Whales
Being Small Is a Benefit: Leveraging Size as a Bootstrapper
Too Many Eyes: Why Bootstrapped Companies Stop Being Transparent
(Eventually)
The Stability Stage
The Stability Stage and You
Building Relationships: Working with Customers
Customer Service at Scale: Helping Those Who Helps Themselves
Customer Exploration: Seeing Through Your Customer’s Eyes
Customer Retention: Keeping Them Around
Building a Mature Business
Continuous Validation: Staying in Touch with Your Market
Roadmaps and You: Building a Future Together
Building a Sellable Business
Standard Operating Procedures: Managing Your Future Self
Building a Mature Product
Made to Stick: Shaping an Extensible Product
The Power of Omission: Killing Features for Fun and Profit
Building a Team
When You Reach Your Limits: Growing a Company Beyond the Founder(s)
Building a Brand
You Want a Tribe
Positioning Is Where It’s At
A Unified Voice: Staying Consistent When You Grow
The Growth Stage
Should You Sell Your Company?
Selling Your Company
The End of an Era
At a Crossroads: The Different Kinds of Exits
Preparing for the Sale From Day One: Getting the Documentation Right
Priming Your Business for Due Diligence
So You Got an Offer: Due Diligence on Your Potential Acquirer
Earn-Outs: Sticking Around After You Sell
What’s Next? The Surprising Consequences of Having Sold a Business
Keeping Your Company
Beyond Bootstrapping
Financing for the Hesitant: Investment Options
Into the Thunderdome: Taking Venture Capital
Closing Words
Now what?
About the Author
All of the really successful people I know have a really strong action
bias. They just do things.
NAVAL RAVIKANT
AN INTRODUCTION TO ZERO TO SOLD
Many people dream of having a business that makes money for them while
they sleep. Yet, most people never turn that dream into reality. Life gets in
the way, they say, and they aren’t cut out to be a business owner anyway.
I believe differently. I think that everyone can be an entrepreneur and
create a sustainable business that will allow them to live a life of freedom
and financial independence. It will require some sacrifice, as building a
business will take a lot of work and time. But it will lead to a life of control,
a life of choice, and a life of opportunity.
Zero to Sold will show you what the life of a bootstrapped founder will
look like. It will teach you how to fill all the roles required to run a business
and what you need to get done in each stage of your bootstrapped
company’s evolution.
No matter if you are just starting to think about being an entrepreneur,
are in the middle of running a bootstrapped company, or are a seasoned
founder, you will find useful strategies, thought-provoking anecdotes, and
insightful concepts in this guide.
Zero to Sold will focus on examples from the Software-as-a-Service
(SaaS) ecosystem, as this is my area of expertise. Most advice will be
applicable to non-software businesses, too.
While this is a guide, a manual, and a compendium, in the end, you are
the agent of your own success. Carefully reflect if the advice in this book
applies to your business. Read and learn as much as you can, but treat all
guidance and direction as anecdotal. You will have to find your own
combination of strategies and tactics. Zero to Sold will help you get there.
ON BOOTSTRAPPING
THE FEEDBACKPANDA STORY
I wrote Zero to Sold because I've been through starting multiple
bootstrapped businesses, growing a few, and selling one of them. Allow me
to share the story of the one I sold.
Within two years, I co-founded, ran, grew, and finally sold a Software-
as-a-Service business called FeedbackPanda, a productivity tool for online
English teachers.
What many don’t realize is that this was an overnight success many
years in the making. FeedbackPanda wasn't my first rodeo. I've been part of
many internet businesses before, and I've had my fair share of failures. I
was in businesses where we never finished building the product. I co-
founded startups that fizzled out because we didn't know how to market our
service. I've been involved in companies that didn't find a way to monetize
their popular products, only to pivot to something completely different after
many years of trying to make it work.
I'll be sharing my experiences from both FeedbackPanda and the not-so-
successful startups in this book, as I believe that you can learn the most at
the intersection of experience and knowledge. So, I will provide you with
both.
FeedbackPanda, the business that changed my life, was a service born
out of necessity. It was a product that solved one critical problem for a well-
defined audience, that allowed me to experience and learn the things that I
have compiled into this book.
FeedbackPanda was a collaborative effort between me and my
girlfriend, Danielle Simpson, who was an online English teacher at the
time. We bootstrapped the business from day one, and when we sold it for
what I would call a life-changing amount of money, the Monthly Recurring
Revenue (MRR) of FeedbackPanda had just reached $55,000.
Within two years, we had built a niche service from a proof-of-concept
into a thriving business that was attractive enough for a Private Equity firm
to take it off our hands.
So, where did this all start?
It started with a leg injury. In early 2017, Danielle suffered an injury
that meant she couldn't leave the house for a while. For a trained Opera
singer like her, that made regular work impossible. You can't invite an
audience of hundreds into your living room for a concert.
Danielle started looking for work she could do from home, and she
found something interesting. A wave of Chinese companies had emerged
that recruited native English speakers to teach English as a second language
to Chinese students. She tried it out and was hooked immediately: it was a
fun job, it could be done using just a laptop, and the pay was alright.
Shortly after, she found that there were several large online
communities of teachers who taught for various Chinese companies.
Danielle joined those online social media groups and forums and started
hanging out with her virtual colleagues that numbered in the thousands at
that point.
A few weeks into teaching on a full-time schedule, she noticed things
that started as nuisances but quickly became painful problems. The teaching
part of her job was great and fun, but certain formalities took way too much
additional time.
The most noticeable problem was student feedback. After every 25-
minute lesson, the teacher would have to write a few paragraphs of a lesson
report that was supposed to inform the parents of what their child had
learned, how well they learned it, and what they could practice at home.
Having only five minutes between lessons to take care of this and
everything else (ranging from grabbing a coffee to using the restroom),
Danielle would defer this work until after she was done teaching for the
day. It couldn't be avoided, as the Chinese companies would not pay
teachers for their teaching work unless the feedback was provided as well.
When Danielle started teaching 10-hour days, the added feedback time
would often amount to almost two hours of unpaid overtime. That meant
two hours less for spending time with me, meeting friends, or reading a
good book.
So she did what anyone would do: she developed a system, using Excel
sheets and Word documents to track information about what her students
learned, how they did, and what to suggest to their parents. She started
using text templates for the content of the lesson and the preparation hints,
as the Chinese schools defined the curriculum, and it could be used as a
template for every student.
We found out that many other teachers did the same when they started
talking about their self-built solutions in their online communities. Teachers
began to share their templates through Google sheets. It was clear that this
was a shared problem in a very tight-knit community.
One day, Danielle and I talked about the painful experience of student
feedback, and how her system, even though it helped, was clunky and
overwhelming. I looked into it, and it seemed quite possible to build a web-
based application that would do this work faster and more reliably.
We also saw that this would be a great business opportunity. There was
a sizeable market with an apparent, shared, and critical problem. The
problem was solvable, but no one had yet built anything to make it
noticeably easier. So we decided to build a validation prototype, to see if it
had a meaningful impact on Danielle's day-to-day workflow.
It took me a week or two to build the system. When Danielle started
using it, the workflow impact was obvious: she transferred her Excel and
Word files into the system, and the automation kicked in immediately.
Instead of two hours of extra work each day, it would take her less than
10 minutes altogether. We knew we were onto something big from that very
moment.
I had built the software with potentially turning it into a SaaS in mind. It
had an authentication system built on Auth0 that would allow users to log in
using their social media accounts—after all, that's where we knew they
hung out. It had a rudimentary subscription system built on Stripe that
allowed us to charge from day one.
So, we released it to the public, built a landing page, and waited.
Nothing happened. One or two people signed up for the free trial, but there
was not much else. We hadn't done any marketing, and we hadn't made any
sales. The service just sat there, idling.
And then, one day, everything changed. In a comment to a Facebook
post about how teachers dealt with feedback, Danielle dropped the link to
our product with an explanation of how she used it. Teachers started to
respond, asking for more details, they checked out the program, and came
back to share their newly found discovery on social media.
Our growth was almost entirely organic since that day. This one
comment released an avalanche of word-of-mouth marketing that fueled the
growth of our business from its first few users to thousands of customers a
couple of months later. It was surreal, but we had tapped into a highly
active tribe. Once we understood that, we didn't need to do much when it
came to marketing our product: our users would do most of that for us.
Signups surged on that day, and there has not been a day without at least
a few dozen new subscriptions ever since. Online teaching influencers
discovered the product, talked about it through their channels, put links on
their blogs, and our landing page started to receive more and more visitors.
Danielle was at the helm of product and design, while I managed the
technical and infrastructural parts of the business. We shared most other
jobs, particularly customer service. Over time, we automated the company
as much as we could. We documented our internal processes so we could
easily outsource or take over each other's activities. We built the business as
if we were to eventually sell it, even though that was never our goal. The
only goal we set was to help teachers do their jobs better and pay our bills.
We had noticed that teachers loved to share, so we added a collaboration
system where they could help each other out by sharing their templates. All
of a sudden, we had a product that developed a strong network effect
overnight.
And that feature made the business grow beyond our wildest
expectations. Every day, new teachers would sign up, and since we
provided a service that solved their problems well, we had incredibly high
retention and conversion rates.
For many of our customers, teaching from home was a side hustle.
Using our product enabled many of them to turn this into a full-time source
of income. We priced our service to be affordable and easily justified. We
even increased our prices by 50% a year into running the business, and it
continued growing nevertheless.
So we coasted along, adding new customers every day, building features
and making the service more reliable, and integrating deeper and deeper
into the web-based teaching software our customers were using. Everything
looked and felt awesome.
And then, things started to become stressful. The customer service load
increased with more and more new teachers signing up. Maintaining
integrations took time out of my feature budget, as the boom of online
education in China meant a proliferation of online teaching companies that
we needed to support. I had made a few questionable technical decisions
that came back to bite me in the shape of unexpected downtime. I
developed severe anxieties that took me a lot of willpower to work through.
The more people I felt responsible for, the more it pained me when
something went wrong.
That's when I learned the true nature of entrepreneurial life. It is fun, but
it is also painful at times. It is full of responsibilities, real or imagined, and
it can bring great joy as well as significant pain. We never hired an
employee throughout the lifetime of the business, and while we talked
about it often, we never got to it. FeedbackPanda was run just by Danielle
and me.
So when we started receiving the first acquisition offers, we began to
seriously consider selling the business. We had never talked about that
before, as we were quite happy to run the business as our full-time
occupation. But more and more reasons to sell popped into our
conversations, so that one day, when we got a particularly exciting offer, we
decided to go for it.
We sold FeedbackPanda in mid-2019, just under two years after
founding the company. It was an exciting and scary thing to do, and this
book is one of the results of that journey. Having always been an avid
reader and an admirer of the bootstrapped founder and indie hacker
community, I write this in the hope that it will encourage founders and
founders-to-be to start, run, and sell their own bootstrapped businesses.
I learned so much during the time from start to exit, from zero to sold.
Now it's time to share the lessons and experiences of that journey.
WHAT IS BOOTSTRAPPING?
Before we dive into the details of the journey of a bootstrapped founder,
we should take a look at the core topic of this entrepreneurial approach:
bootstrapping.
The original meaning comes from the metaphor of pulling yourself up
by your own bootstraps. That is a logical impossibility, of course. However,
it is an excellent analogy to creating a business from nothing, without any
outside funding or assistance. Bootstrapping is about accomplishing the
unlikely using as few resources as possible.
Several names often get conflated with bootstrapping, mostly “self-
funded,” “customer-funded,” and “indie-funded.” Then, there is also the
term “semi-bootstrapped.”
Self-funded: A bootstrapped business starts with almost no money and
slowly gathers steam. A self-funded business involves a significant
investment of personal founder capital—and usually hits the ground
running. Some founders use their savings, and some get loans or credit
lines. A bootstrapped business is always self-funded, but not every self-
funded business is bootstrapped.
Customer-funded: If you set up your business to be profitable from
day one, and use the revenue you generate to pay for your services, you are
customer-funded. This also extends to going into partnerships with
customers to build specific features, where the customers take over the
development cost, at least partially. A working bootstrapped business is
eventually customer-funded, like any successful business, but not every
customer-funded company is bootstrapped.
Indie-funded: If your business receives funding from independent, non-
traditional sources like banks or venture capital funds, you can call it indie-
funded. Crowd-investing and crowd-financing count toward this definition
as well. The difference compared to traditional funding is the level of
expectation regarding your growth and business goals. Indie funding
sources understand that you may want to create a cash-flow-positive
lifestyle business, and they are perfectly fine if you don’t exhibit hockey
stick-like growth.
Finally, a semi-bootstrapped business is a business that exhibits all the
typical behaviors and properties of a bootstrapped company, but uses
outside funding of any kind to accelerate parts of the business without
subjecting itself to paradigm-shifting expectations of its growth trajectory.
The business will still minimize its expenses, automate as much as possible,
and build sustainable, long-term-focused processes. It just uses some money
to fuel its marketing, development, or any other part of the business.
There is a debate about whether “bootstrapping” is the right word for
what we do. Hiten Shah says it should be called “self-funded” from the
start, and it feels like the whole debate could be solved with a Venn
diagram.
To me, bootstrapping is the act of creating a valuable, sustainable
business with little to no funding. It’s a founder mindset, a focus on making
fiscally responsible business decisions and looking for sustainable long-
term growth, and meaningful relationships with every single customer.
THE FOUR STAGES OF A BOOTSTRAPPED
BUSINESS
Every successful bootstrapped business goes through four distinct
phases: Preparation, Survival, Stability, and Growth, each separated by
revenue and profit levels. Every stage introduces new problems and
situations to resolve. I’ll guide you through each phase in detail, describing
what will happen to the business, the product, the founder, and the
customers throughout the entrepreneurial journey.
In the Preparation Stage, the focus will be on finding an audience,
their biggest problem, and a solution that solves that problem in a way to
make people pay for it. You will find out how to price your product initially
and start selling.
In the Survival Stage, the focus will be on finding a repeatable way to
make money. You will learn how to work on the product, listen to your
early customers, and start building out processes and automation to stay on
top of your business.
In the Stability Stage, you have found your way to generating steady
revenue. At that point, you will look into offering a stable, mature product,
hiring people to help you run the business, and building long-lasting
relationships with your customers.
In the Growth Stage, you will find yourself at a crossroads: should you
keep running the company, or do you want to sell it? You will discover
strategies and step-by-step guidelines that will allow you to do either, as
you will learn how to remove yourself from the business.
Finally, you will learn about other options beyond bootstrapping,
including venture capital, bootstrapper-friendly funding options, and
traditional sources of capital.
THE PREPARATION STAGE
THE PREPARATION STAGE AND YOU
Every business starts in your imagination. To some, it’s an idea of
solving a problem in a new way. To others, it’s the dream of managing a
company from a beach somewhere. Whatever the initial spark is, there is a
long way between that first fragment of a plan to a sustainable business
that’s getting along fine.
First, you will turn your idea into a product you can sell. Then, you will
create a business: a system that allows you to sell that product over and
over again.
This stage ends when you begin selling your product to your audience.
To get there, you will need to reach the following five goals:
1. Find your niche audience.
2. Find and validate their critical problem.
3. Invent and validate a solution to their problem.
4. Build a product to implement that solution.
5. Build a business that can repeatedly sell that product to your
audience.
Your revenue will be at zero or even negative, as you have pre-sales
expenses. That means this may be the most expensive phase for a
bootstrapped founder, as there is no way to generate earnings from a
business that does not yet sell a product. However, operational expenses
will be low as you will likely be able to coast along using the free tiers of
the services required to build and deploy an initial prototype of your
software product. Mostly, this phase will cost you time and focus.
FROM IDEA TO PRODUCT
FROM IDEA TO PRODUCT
Tech founders—and I count myself as one—focus on products because
that is what we use to solve our problems. After all, when you run into a
challenging task, what do you look for first? An in-depth scientific
explanation for the epistemological essence of the task? Or a tool that will
do the job for you seconds after you install it?
Most people, particularly entrepreneurs, will prefer the shiny product to
the in-depth analysis. After all, we have a job to do.
That way of thinking often leads founders to create products that are
solutions looking for a problem. It’s no surprise that many of the products
launched on ProductHunt fizzle out quickly after the launch: they address
unvalidated problems for audiences that may or may not exist.
Successful businesses are built by solving critical problems for an
audience that will pay for a solution to their issues. The Preparation Stage is
when you make these foundational choices. Once in motion, a business has
certain inertia that makes these decisions hard to change. Even though
pivoting your business into new markets is sometimes the right choice, it’s
extra effort. That’s why it’s a good idea to spend considerable time on
getting it right in the first place.
Here's an important tip about conducting conversations with your
prospects: record your prospects after asking them for permission. You will
be far too busy making sure you get information from your customers to
retain everything they said. Record the calls and wait a few days before you
analyze the results. Right after a call, you may still be under the influence
of primacy and confirmation biases, so let some time pass between the
conversation and the analysis.
YOU PROBABLY HAVE IT BACKWARDS:
STARTING A BOOTSTRAPPED BUSINESS
Many businesses start with a product idea. They then try to find a market
that’s willing to buy that product. They fail because there were not enough
customers. They fail because the product solved the wrong problem. They
fail because the product solved the problem the wrong way. And
sometimes, they fail even though the product solved the customers'
problems.
That happens because many founders build their businesses with a
product-first approach. But audience research, problem analysis, and
solution validation should happen before you think about a product. While
this may seem counter-indicative in a world of polished products that we
use every day, it is much more likely to build a great business on a validated
market, filling a validated need for people who will be able to pay enough
for you to sustain your business and your life.
Many successful bootstrapped businesses start with an audience, a
specific niche. They find their customers' critical problems and provide
valuable solutions that people gladly pay for. Their product is centered
around continuously providing value to new and existing customers.
Audience, problem, solution, and product can be looked at individually.
The questions you should be asking yourself are, in this order:
1. Who am I helping? You will discover how to find the perfect
niche and make sure it can support your business in Step One:
Your Audience.
2. Why do they need help? Learn how to find and validate their
critical problem in Step Two: Their Problem.
3. How can I help them with that? Find a good solution and make
sure it fits into your prospective customers' workflow in Step
Three: Your Solution.
4. What can I create to help them that way? You'll learn how to
create an easy-to-maintain and reliable product in Step Four: Your
Product.
STEP ONE: YOUR AUDIENCE
BOOTSTRAPPING AN AUDIENCE
A business would be nothing without customers. You can have the best
product in the world, but you won’t be able to build any meaningful
business if there is no one to pay for what you offer.
So, where do you find those paying customers? The first step to
building a business is answering that question, and for bootstrapped
founders, there is one critical component: finding the perfect niche.
You’ll see why niches are essential and what makes niche communities
especially interesting: homogenous populations with tribe-like structures
that can be leveraged by bootstrapped founders in unique ways.
We will take a look at what makes a fruitful market, and how to figure
out if it will be a good one for your business.
For a bootstrapped business, the choice of your target audience has a
few significant limitations: you will have to be careful to find a market that
sits in the Goldilocks Zone between too small and too big, and, at best, it
should grow in a certain way. You will discover how to find the numbers
and figures to make informed choices about your audience.
After all, it all starts with the people you want to help. The more you
know about them, the better.
THE POWER OF THE NICHE
If you were to found a company that makes and sells beer today, you
would probably start a craft brewery. You’d start a small operation, find the
people who enjoy your product, and slowly expand your business.
You would not try to compete with Bud Light and Heineken for shelf
space. You would prefer to provide a unique product to a small, specialized
segment of the beer-drinking population. The craft beer enthusiasts would
be your target audience.
You would start in a niche.
For your bootstrapped business, finding your niche is an integral part of
the journey. In a niche, you will encounter less competition. Your customers
will be very similar, and your marketing and sales activities can be turned
into repeatable processes quite easily.
So, what makes a niche interesting for a bootstrapper? What is it about
niche customers that you can leverage to create a sustainable business?
How deep a niche do you need to find a good audience?
What’s (in) a Niche?
When we speak of niches in business, we always talk about smaller
segments of a larger population. We’re looking for a specific subset of a
more general group of people. The kind of specificity can vary wildly:
sometimes we look for immutable things like age or gender niches. Other
times the specifics we’re interested in are fluid things like preferences or
experience levels. Some niches can be large enough to contain millions of
people, and others might just consist of a handful of individuals.
What unites all niches is that they are inclusive of some and exclusive
of others. The members of the in-group will be reasonably similar,
depending on the specificity of the niche. That’s why niches work so well
for bootstrapped businesses: if you can provide a tool that solves a niche
problem very well, you can be sure that everyone in the niche will be
interested in it.
Selling to a niche is very different from selling to the general public. If
we go back to the example of the beer industry, you will see that Anheuser-
Busch InBev, the makers of Bud Light, spend more than $1.5 billion every
year. They do that because they need to be present in the mind of every
single shopper when they think of getting a beer. For a small craft beer
company, this kind of marketing expense is impossibly high, and it would
be a waste. They would show their product to millions of people, but only a
fraction of them would even consider drinking a non-mainstream beer.
Niche businesses are better off spending much less money in much more
directed ways. A craft beer company might put up flyers in a local pub that
is serving lots of craft beers, or allocate a budget to exhibiting at beer
festivals. A niche business will market to its niche and no one else.
Who’s in a Niche?
So, what makes niche populations unique? The way I see it, they are mostly
homogenous, often tribal, and allow for much better measurement and
planning than huge non-specific audiences.
Niche Populations Are Homogenous
If you filter a large group of people by several specific properties, you will
end up with an audience that shares those properties. As a result, these
people will also share many other things that can make building products
and selling them very convenient.
People in your niche will likely have the same problems. If they love
fantasy football, they all need to keep track of their teams. If they enjoy fly-
fishing, they all need to find information on where to fish and how the
weather will impact their chances of a catch.
If you spend enough time investigating the problems of your niche, you
will sooner or later surface their critical problems. These are the things that
are common roadblocks for everyone in the niche. Solving that problem
with a dedicated product will allow you to have a high chance of success
with your bootstrapped business.
People in a niche will also share very similar goals and aspirations.
People who love knitting want to make beautiful pieces of clothing. Craft
beer fans want to find (and drink!) the best and most exciting beers in their
area. Recruiters want to recruit as many well-fitting candidates as possible.
From a goal, you can usually infer a problem that is in the way of your
customers' path to success. Solve that problem, and you can help everyone
in the niche reach their goals.
People in your niche will also speak the same (metaphorical) language.
While many niches are globally distributed, the people in them will all
share a common understanding of what matters to them. Dungeons &
Dragons fans will know what a D20 is, and woodworking aficionados will
have no trouble understanding why you’d prefer Alternate Top Bevel over
Flat Top Grind saw blades for a clean cut. In your marketing
communication, you can assume that everyone in the niche has specific
knowledge that you can build on. Not only does this allow you to be precise
in your communication, but it will also show that you know what you’re
talking about; that you are one of them.
Niche Populations Are Tribal
That brings us to another fundamental property of niche populations: they
are often organized tribally. Seth Godin wrote a book called Tribes, in
which he describes a tribe as “a group of people connected to one another,
connected to a leader, and connected to an idea.” That sure sounds like a
niche audience!
This interconnected group of people looking for leadership can be a
godsend for your business. You can either leverage existing leaders in the
community, which are usually called “influencers,” or you can become a
tribe leader yourself. There is room for a lot of leaders in most niche tribes.
In such a position, you are regarded as an expert who also offers a product
specifically designed for members of the tribe. This position makes selling
significantly easier than hoping for random strangers to see your product
and buy it on a store shelf.
People derive their identity from belonging to a tribe. If you can place
your business in a way that makes your product a thing that “people in our
tribe use,” then you will have a guaranteed sales funnel for as long as your
niche exists.
Niche Populations Are Measurable
In niches, you can find out the numbers more easily than in a more general
population. If you’re trying to find out how many potential customers you
have, it will be much easier if you’re a craft beer brewery that has
advertisements running in 10 local pubs. Figuring out how many patrons
they can reach will require a few evenings of counting people in those
places. For Anheuser-Busch InBev, it’s an entirely different story: for them,
every human on earth who likes beer is a potential customer—but the
chances of them buying are hard to calculate, and so is the effectiveness of
a massive billboard campaign in hundreds of cities.
With large populations, measuring is a hit-or-miss activity, as everyone
is competing for attention. Within a niche, you can expect much more
engagement from your potential customers as soon as they are exposed to
your content.
The better you define your niche market, the more confident you can be
in your numbers. “People who like fantasy football” may be a vague
definition that doesn’t give you much to work with. “People who logged
into one of the three most popular fantasy football websites over the last
three months” will yield more actionable numbers. At best, you will get
numbers that allow you to validate a viable audience for your bootstrapped
business: not too small and not too big.
The Ins and Outs of a Niche
An interesting perspective on niches is that you can also look at what a
niche does not contain. By defining things that you don’t expect to see in
your niche, you have access to exclusionary filtering as well.
Once you know what you don’t have to care about in your niche, you
have the means to deal with the inevitable noise that you’ll find in every
market, no matter how well-defined your audience is. There always will be
misfits and contrarian voices. By knowing what you can ignore, your focus
will be on the things that matter most to the most substantial part of your
niche.
Opportunities of a Niche
With niche audiences being homogenous, tribal, and measurable, you have
several opportunities to help your bootstrapped business succeed:
Low-Cost Marketing
Shared interests will allow you to speak to the needs of your niche audience
directly. Creating content that has a lot of impact and will be read by a lot of
people will be easier, as there is less competition for your audience’s
attention. More generic markets might be saturated with content, but inside
a niche community, people will always be eager to learn more about their
area of expertise.
Targeted advertising works very well for niches, too. As pay-per-click
costs are lower for many niche terms, your ad campaigns will be much
more cost-effective than if you were to target a more generic term. The
more specifically you can define your audience, the more effective your
campaign will be. This also extends to traditional media of communication.
If your niche audience is fond of reading industry magazines, a print
advertisement could put you in front of hundreds of thousands of readers
who would be hard to reach using digital ads.
Partnerships in niches become a much more lucrative endeavor.
Additional exposure and reach results in quick win-win situations, where
both partners can significantly boost both their customer base and their
reputation as an expert in the niche. Partnering up with other players in the
niche allows you to reach customers at different stages of “niche
proficiency,” increasing the breadth of your sales funnel.
If you lead a tribe, it will eventually do the marketing for you. A large
following will amplify your messages with a lot of reach, giving you
credibility and encouraging newcomers to become customers so they can
belong to the tribe.
At FeedbackPanda, Danielle started a tribe around her thought
leadership in the field of online teaching. She became an advocate for the
needs of these teachers, and they followed her actively on social media,
engaging in conversations, spreading the word, and, best of all, even
defending the company and the product against people who dismissed or
publicly disliked it. That’s the power of a tribe.
Word-of-mouth marketing is another effect of using tribal structures in a
niche. If you give people the opportunities to share your content and
messages with other tribe members, they will. The interconnected nature of
tribes facilitates this rapid exchange of information, and if you leverage
those channels, your product will sell itself. At FeedbackPanda, it took one
well-placed social media comment to start an avalanche of word-of-mouth
referrals that lasted for years.
Referral Marketing Systems
If you’re in a niche with a healthy and active tribe, you will have success
with customer referral systems. As Ryan Kulp explains, the effect of
referrals will depend on the shareability of your product. Some products
will make sharing easier, like network-effect-driven collaboration tools,
where a new user will add value to the network for everyone involved.
Other products won’t be as easy to share, such as a tool that makes a
recruiter find better leads—recruiters probably wouldn’t want competitors
to use this tool as well.
If your product is shareable, spend time on creating a referral system
early in the life of your business. If it’s not shareable, defer this kind of
system until you have exhausted better, more effective marketing
techniques.
Influencer Reach
Niche influencers are usually perceived as much more professional public
personas than the more general kind of celebrity influencer. Most niche
influencers are experts in their fields, and what they talk about positively
gains credibility. Their following consists mostly of other members of the
niche, making them an excellent candidate for spreading your message.
Luckily, these influencers are also much cheaper to partner with than the
prominent super-influencers. Often, they are not even aware of their
influence, or they don’t necessarily see it as a monetizable activity. While I
recommend you still offer them reasonable compensation, you can approach
niche influencers as potential partners instead of just seeing them as a
marketing channel.
Differentiation Is Easy
Lastly, it’s easy to build a unique and differentiated product when the
landscape of competitors and competitive alternatives is clear and
uncluttered. Fewer competitors means more potential differentiation
vectors: you can stand out much more by providing a service that is not yet
offered in the niche.
Analyze your competitors for what they do well and what they don’t
when you do your market research. If you’ve done your problem validation
right, you will see gaps in the market that are not yet served. Build your
products around those gaps, and look into partnering with your competitors
to expand each other’s customer base.
Look out for non-competitor competitive alternatives: the things people
use instead of using an actual product. This can be Post-It notes, an Excel
spreadsheet that does not involve numbers, anything that is a general tool
applied to a specific problem. These types of makeshift solutions are where
you can find your critical problems—and that is where you can best serve
your niche.
The only remaining question is, “How narrow do I need to make my
niche?” In reality, this will depend on the size and quality of the initial
group of people you niche down from. The more specific you get, the
smaller your audience will be in scale. Like in machine learning, you run
the risk of “overfitting” your niche; you might get too specific. There could
be a few hundred “Star Trek fans that live in the New Orleans area and love
to eat Quinoa,” but that won’t sustain a bootstrapped business.
In general, a good niche size will allow you room to grow to your
Monthly Recurring Revenue goal and still leave space for a few
competitors. To determine the size of your audience, you will need to do
some research. Your target size should be small enough not to invite large
competitors and big enough to sustain your business. If it’s too generic,
narrow the niche by being more specific in who you want to serve. If there
are too few prospects, broaden the niche by loosening the requirements for
someone to fit into the niche.
A good niche will allow you to build a product that solves one problem
well. In the best case, this will be the critical problem of everyone in the
niche, and your product will ideally solve it well enough for your customers
to tell everyone they know, and allow your product to sell itself.
DECIDING ON A MARKET FOR YOUR BUSINESS
A bootstrapped business works best when it starts out in a niche. Most
companies will do really well by just staying there. Some expand into other
markets. But that initial audience is one of the most important things to
carefully select when you start a business.
When we started FeedbackPanda, we had noticed a painful problem. A
problem we experienced for ourselves. So we solved it for ourselves. We
then saw that other teachers, just like Danielle, could benefit from our
solution. They had the exact same problem. We knew our first version
already solved the problem well. That’s why we knew other teachers would
pay for it.
But were there enough teachers? And would they be willing to pay? Did
they have the same need?
In short, we needed to figure out if our combination of problem and
solution had an addressable market. In my experience from FeedbackPanda
and the startups I have worked at before, this can be determined by asking
the following questions.
Is the Audience Large Enough?
Your audience will have to be big enough to sustain your business. It will
likely also have to support competitors, as any successful business will
attract competition.
Determining the size of our audience is a rather work-intensive task, but
absolutely required before you decide to invest your time in starting a
business in a market. It boils down to doing the research and asking subject
matter experts in the field about the current size and the growth trajectory. If
you think that you can make a good living with whatever business model
you decide to use, the niche is right for you. If there are not enough people,
widen the niche by adding adjacent groups to your audience and see if you
can adjust the problem (and your solution) to serve those people, too.
Is the Audience Small Enough?
Contrary to popular belief, I think that for a bootstrapped company, in
particular, some markets can be too big. Some audiences are too generic,
some industries too vast for a great niche to exist. At least, in the beginning,
you should have a clearly defined niche. As a bootstrapped entrepreneur,
you will reach out to customers and be in direct contact. For that to work,
you have to be able to find the right people. And, if there are millions of
people in an industry, your chances of finding the right ones go down
significantly. Finding the subject matter experts will be extremely difficult
at that point.
If you find that your audience is too general, try adding constraints. If
you’re looking at teachers as your market, for example, make it teachers
who teach math. Problems change, they become clearer, and solutions
become more focused. Math teachers in K12 talk to other math teachers in
K12, for example. The smaller your audience, the more it has built-in
network effects.
Can They Pay? Will They Pay?
Sometimes, you will be serving companies that have a budget for what you
offer. Other times, you could help a currently underserved segment of a
low-wage industry. The capacity and willingness to pay will be very
different between those two.
While it is enticing to go for the big guys with the massive budgets, you
will encounter a lot of competition there. The willingness to pay is there,
but you will have to work hard to make them switch vendors or justify
another expense. They will also be hard to retain, as they are capable of
changing vendors quickly in such a crowded field.
Serving a currently underserved market comes with the opposite
problem. There won’t be much competition, and people are not used to
paying for solutions. They often have scraped by using their own tools built
on Excel or Google sheets. You will have to spend more time convincing
people that your solution will provide substantial value before they grab
their credit card. Once previously underserved customers commit to paying,
they will be your customers for a long time. You can build a lot of goodwill
from serving such a market, and it will create a lot of value for your
company.
At FeedbackPanda, we have had the opportunity to serve such an
underserved market. We still have customers from when we first launched
the product, when word-of-mouth marketing was our only channel. These
are the truly loyal customers who felt nothing but appreciation for being
finally served. That allowed us to ask them to talk about us in their social
communities, which they did to significant effect.
If you have found a painful problem, a niche audience that is both small
and big enough for your business, and you have made sure your audience is
willing to pay for your solution, you have found your niche. From here you
can build out your product and marketing strategies for that market.
There are a few more things to consider that are great to have in a
market, but are not important enough to be a good reason to not go into a
market when they’re missing.
If your market has adjacent product opportunities, that will give you a
chance to think about future ancillary products you can sell. For our teacher
market, where we focused on solving their productivity problems, one
could imagine offering additional products that engaged the other issues
that self-employed teachers might have, such as scheduling or tracking their
invoices. To know that these issues are mostly unsolved as well allows you
to think about where to expand the business when it becomes successful.
You should also think about how easy it will be to scale your business in
that market. Most of the time, your market won’t grow enough to keep your
business growing as a side-effect. You will need to broaden your audience.
Knowing that there are untapped groups and customer segments will make
this a strategy you can keep in the back of your mind. For our business, it
was knowing that while we were serving the teachers for several online
English schools, there were still hundreds of other schools. They were both
already in the market and popping up all over the place. We would then just
add support for more of those teachers to increase our own growth rate.
Knowing if you need to focus more on sales or on marketing is very
important. Some markets require you to reach out to buyers individually.
For others, a good and well-targeted marketing strategy could mean you
will never have to talk to a single customer before they subscribe or
purchase. Being aware of how this will develop over time is essential in
order to decide where to focus your attention.
What Are Good Markets for Bootstrapped SaaS?
If you see that significant forces are terraforming a market, creating an
opportunity where there was none before, that is a good sign. Whenever a
new kind of technology or process gets traction in a field that has not seen
much change before, it will create little points of friction. Some of them
will be critical. These will be the ones that warrant creating a SaaS
business.
Any newly created niches are interesting for the bootstrapped SaaS
founder. The problems there will be unique, exciting, and can usually be
solved quite well if they are in a well-defined niche. Often, these niches are
not yet regulated to death, so you will have the opportunity to experiment
without having to follow strict guidelines or rules. You may often be the
one setting those guidelines and laying the groundwork for future
regulations.
Some markets, where a lot of small deciders with their own budgets
make decisions, are very lucrative. These people can be convinced without
needing to deploy corporate diplomacy. You can show them a product, and
they will try it out, as they have no one telling them not to. Small businesses
and freelancers are great audiences for a bootstrapped SaaS, as they have
budgets. Small budgets, maybe, but if there is a painful problem, there will
be money to fix it.
Underserved markets are a great place to start a company, as mentioned
earlier. There will be no meaningful competition, customers will love the
fact that someone is finally thinking of them, and you will get a lot of
market share quickly if you find a market where scaling is not too
complicated.
What Are Bad Markets for Bootstrapped SaaS?
Just as much as there are good markets to start out in, some markets will
make it harder to run a bootstrapped business.
Enterprise markets are hard to sell into for a small company, although
it’s not impossible. Purchasing decisions take a long time, there are a lot of
requirements even to be considered, and contracts tend to be custom and
require a lot of work. Many enterprise customers won’t buy from small
companies out of fear they will vanish within a few years, and that fear is
not unfounded. In fact, even for your own bootstrapped business, I would
recommend against using services offered by companies smaller than
yourself. You will be better off looking for a market that is comprised of
small to medium-sized businesses and self-employed freelancers.
You can still sell to more prominent companies as long as their
decision-makers are relatively far down the corporate hierarchy. If selling to
a business involves any high-level management or even C-level approval,
the market may not be for your bootstrapped company. At least not when
you start out.
Monopoly markets with just a few big players will severely limit your
options. You won’t have many opportunities to experiment when every
sales call is critical to your survival. And as a small business, your leverage
is insignificant when your customers are much bigger than you are. Aim for
equal size or smaller.
Markets where years of ruthless competition have created a large
number of bottom feeders are hazardous. In the beginning, you may be able
to compete on price, but competitors with deeper pockets than you can sell
at a loss for longer than any bootstrapped business. Also, customers in such
a market are not the dedicated, enthusiastic, and joyful customers you want
to serve.
When Markets Turn
Good markets turn to bad markets all of the time. There are sure signs when
a good market is starting to turn bad, and there are indicators for when
previously unsuitable markets are promising to become interesting.
Most companies are well aware of this and adapt to those changes.
Often, entire divisions of businesses are dropped or sold off when a market
that previously worked is turning into a loss center.
Markets that are becoming hostile to businesses usually are full of very
similar competitors, fighting it out over price and marginal differences. This
saturation makes it hard to enter a market, and even the businesses that are
already in that market suffer.
Technological changes often destroy or abandon entire markets, as
email did for companies selling fax machines. There still could be a niche
for that technology, but focusing on legacy does not usually promise a
bright future.
When markets shrink, that is often a sign of deterioration. Whenever the
number of agents and purchasers in a market decreases, business growth
stalls. People cut costs and unnecessary expenses get reduced. All
businesses in that market will suffer.
Attempts at regulating a market after it has been unregulated or
regulated only lightly spell out trouble for the companies in that market. We
have seen this on a global scale with the GDPR and PSD2 regulations in
Europe that drastically affected a few markets and made a lot of small
companies exclude European customers out of fear of being fined millions.
When rules appear, problems follow.
However, you will also find that markets that were once considered to
be infertile ground sprout opportunities. This often happens in the wake of a
technological or structural change. The internet made the online education
market explode, and where before was very little technology in education,
now there are many opportunities. New technologies create new processes.
Both create new problems that did not exist before, and where no prior
solutions exist.
Every market that grows in size significantly after a long period of
stagnant growth is an exciting target. More people mean more customers,
and with a noticeable increase in headcount, new and unique problems will
arise.
Whatever market you choose for your business, make sure you select it with
confidence and the numbers to back it up. The more you know about
determining the size of SaaS markets, and the more you talk to subject
matter experts and long-term residents, the more likely you are to make a
sound decision. Making the correct choice is vital to the success of your
business. Choose wisely.
DETERMINING THE SIZE OF A MARKET
When you’re starting a bootstrapped SaaS business, you have to find a
painful problem to solve. For that, you have to find an audience first. But
how do you figure out if the audience is big enough to support your
business today and five years from now?
There are three different approaches to determining this elusive number.
Different methods will be needed depending on the kind of customers you
want to serve. B2B, B2BC, and B2C markets each need different tools to
figure out those numbers. You can find detailed step-by-step guides below,
based on my own experience in startups working in all three fields.
No matter what kind of service you offer, you will never find exact
numbers about the size of your audience. Most of the time, audience size is
a moving target. Industries contract and expand, sometimes extremely fast,
and any number is outdated within weeks. Even if anyone knew the exact
figures, there would be little value in making them public. You would invite
more competition if it looked juicy. If there is any number at all, treat it like
a tentative figure.
To get to any significant audience size number, you will have to do a lot
of research and collect a lot of information. You won’t do this work in a
day. It may take weeks or even months to sift through the data. Often, a
subject matter expert will drop a number in a side remark of some obscure
industry podcast. The more time you spend looking into many different
places, the more precise your outcome will be.
If you have an enterprise-focused business, it is more likely that you
will find public information you can trust. Consumer-focused companies
have a harder time there, as information will be abundant but very hard to
validate.
Even for enterprise markets, the numbers out there are likely to be
skewed or inflated. It depends on the institution that releases them.
Enterprise companies often are required to publish their financial records
and reports, which include market sizes directly, or at least allow you to
infer them in combination with market share ratios.
Some industry expert groups also release general industry reports,
which often cost money. A good example of this is HolonIQ in the EdTech
space.
These types of reports are well worth it, for two reasons. They
commonly contain the exact information you need and much more that will
allow you to make a very knowledgeable guess as to your chances in that
market.
The second reason is the more important one: many entrepreneurs,
particularly in the bootstrapped community, shy away from spending
money as it goes against the spirit of being scrappy. You will have an
immediate and often critical advantage over those founders who just guess.
They usually guess wrong. When they do, they give up quite quickly.
Spending a few hundred bucks in advance will save you thousands later,
and you will get the condensed findings of subject matter experts in
addition to the numbers you seek.
Finding meaningful numbers in a sea of unfiltered information is
important. A good rule of thumb is to count the number of deciders and not
just the number of buyers in a specific industry. These are sometimes the
same people, but if you sell into enterprise industries, those roles will
diverge. Targeting and selling to the people who decide is critical, so these
are also the relevant people to be counted.
Reading up on the history and evolution of an industry before doing
audience size research is highly recommended. This data will reveal the key
players: you will learn about the tectonic forces of the industry that you
may not be aware of, and you will absorb how change is accepted,
welcome, and often resisted. That will actively inform not just your
approach to determining the size of the audience, but also if it is an
audience worth targeting.
Talk to people in the industry first. Ask them personally for their
opinion about their industry, how big it is, and how big they think it could
get. Find out who are trusted sources of information and on whose numbers
you can rely. Do this part after having done some cursory research, and ask
industry experts their opinion about the sources you have found. You will
be surprised how many people who work in a particular industry every day
completely dismiss many outwardly reputable sources.
Finding B2B Market Sizes
The easiest way to find out how big your B2B audience is would be by
purchasing industry reports from reputable sources. In the EdTech market,
for example, that would be companies like HolonIQ. They are often quite
expensive, but the data they provide is a treasure trove of insight.
Industry magazines, both print versions and online editions, are a
densely packed source of information. Not only do they contain expert
opinions on the field, they also know very well how large their market is, as
they are sold directly to members of that market. The easiest way to find out
numbers here is to ask for the number of magazines they circulate. That can
often be done by asking to publish advertisements in one of their next
issues. Asking for the cost of an ad and the number of people who will see
it will give you two critical insights: the audience number you’re after and
the amount of competition you will have to expect for your audience’s
attention.
More and more industry-specific podcasts are appearing all over the
place. They often feature interviews with C-level executives from big
companies, so they are packed with valuable information about the industry.
Often, the people being interviewed will talk about the market they operate
in, including market size and growth rates. The great thing about podcasts is
that you can just reach out to the host, and you will likely get an answer.
Ask them about what you are looking for and how you can find it, and they
will give you pointers or even numbers they may have access to. Asking
about advertising on podcasts could yield the same kinds of interesting
numbers that asking about advertisements in industry magazines would.
Conferences are a staple in the enterprise world. Often, just looking at
the vendor map of a conference will give you great insight as to the size of
the companies, their position in the market, and the kinds of customers they
serve. It will also allow you to find smaller companies that are in the same
field but whom you may not have heard of yet. For any important industry
conference, download or explore the conference vendor map.
Lastly, enterprise companies have extensive search engine marketing
budgets. Figuring out the search terms they rank for will lead you to get
some insight into how much competition is in that market. You will learn
what companies have found out about the search terms their customers use,
and how much you can expect to spend to be seen by those potential
customers of yours.
Finding B2BC Market Sizes
In B2BC markets, where your customers are freelancers or small
businesses, you will have less access to industry reports. Usually, there are
not enough larger companies in those fields to make a living selling $500+
reports every year, so the industry reports that are available for B2B
markets are likely very scarce for B2BC. The good thing is that most of the
time, a B2BC market is somewhere in the supply chain of a larger B2B
market, so you will still find information about the market as a part of a
bigger industry in those B2B reports. However, they won’t drill down deep
enough for specific information to your B2BC market, so you will need to
find other sources.
The big players in those markets often publicly provide information
about the size of their market to attract funding. While those numbers
are likely overblown for dramatic effect, they will give you an indication as
to the order of magnitude you can expect.
One great thing about B2BC markets is that they are often community-
based. Many freelancers hang out at the same watercooler, which often is
either a social media site or a forum/community that is specific to their
craft. Finding these communities is essential in determining market size.
Social media groups are often a good indicator of size. If just a tiny niche of
people from the market you’re interested in already resides in a social
media group of over 5,000 people, you can expect the actual market to be
quite big. If you can barely find a group at all, your audience may be too
small or somewhere else. Make sure to ask people who work in the industry
to lead you to the place where they gather.
Find and talk to the subject matter experts in the market. These people
are often influencers, publicly communicating about the market and the
developments within it. They have multiple mediums and markets, such as
YouTube channels, Instagram pages, Twitter followings, and much more.
Those are the people who you will find on industry podcasts and giving
interviews on the industry blogs. Reach out to them. They will know
exactly what is going on, how big their audience is, and what the market is
doing.
The hosts of podcasts in B2BC industries are very good targets for your
research, too. Not only do these hosts know a lot about the industry
themselves, but they will also be able to connect you to the subject matter
experts in their network. This is true for any market, but it’s particularly
useful in B2BC markets where there are so many more solo brands.
Finding B2C Market Sizes
Sales reports from companies in the field are a good start for determining
B2C audience sizes. Most companies are private and thus don’t publicly
expose their financial data. However, you can find some information on
how they’re doing financially either by looking at the sales reports those
companies provide themselves, or by investigating their tax reports with the
authorities under which they operate. Those are often semi-public, and you
can request them for a fee from the tax or commerce agencies in the country
of founding.
It’s worth looking into the companies of a market to understand the size
of it. How many people are employed by those companies? How are they
funded? Do they burn through cash, or do they have a reliable revenue
stream? Getting answers to these questions will require asking the people
who work for them. You can do that through sales calls or by reaching out
to them directly with your questions. People often are willing to help people
make progress in their field, as long as you’re not direct competition. It
never hurts to ask.
The competition in B2C markets is notoriously high, as those markets
tend to be where everyone wants to end up. That makes gathering reliable
information very hard. Often, government institutions will keep some
statistical data and make it available either in their publications or upon
request. The same goes for non-profits that exist in almost all markets.
Reaching out and maybe providing them with some value or exposure could
give you a lot of insight.
In summary, finding the size of your potential audience will require you to
gather a lot of information from a lot of sources. Sifting through this
information will take time, so plan accordingly. It’s always worth it to be
personal. Reach out to people who have some standing in the respective
markets and communities. Be truthful about why you ask, and people will
be helpful most of the time. Some won’t be. There will always be skeptics,
and some markets are full of them.
But if you’re determined to find out if a market is a good fit and the
right size for your business, you will get there eventually. Determination is
vital here, as in most parts of starting a new business.
Remember that many founders give up at some point during this
process. Stick with it, and you’ll be ahead of the curve for sure.
STEP TWO: THEIR PROBLEM
IDENTIFYING A CRITICAL PROBLEM: WORKING
ON THE RIGHT THING
Once you have found a suitable audience, you can start looking for
problems. The great thing about niche markets is that the issues in them are
specific and shared by the people in the niche. Solving a common problem
will help a lot of people. You already have the right people. Now you just
need the right problem.
The essential action in this step is to find the most critical problem your
audience is experiencing. You are looking for painful problems, and you
want to solve the most painful of them all. You also need to validate that
this is an actual problem that people need to have addressed. Sometimes,
we just want to complain, but we don’t want to change our ways. You will
need to find a problem so painful that we just have to deal with it.
Once you choose a problem to solve, you create a new business to
market the solution to that problem. Your unique solution helps your
audience deal with a pain they’re feeling. Yet the company fails to take off,
even though you have a good solution and excellent marketing material.
People don’t want to pay for it.
Why is that?
I believe that many bootstrapped businesses only do half the work. They
solve a problem, but they don’t address the most critical problem.
If you want to build a profitable business, you have to solve the most
important problem your customer is facing, the one that, when solved, will
change their life.
So what is the critical problem? What makes it critical?
How to recognize if you are focusing on the critical problem long
before turning it into a business is paramount to a successful business.
There are a few key properties any critical problem has, and if you find an
issue that has these properties, you will have an excellent candidate for a
successful, profitable business.
All businesses solve problems; that’s why we start enterprises. But even
though some businesses solve a problem well, they still fail. The
community Failory has a “Startup Cemetary,” where founders explain why
they think their company didn’t make it. The reasons expressed range from
“Bad Business Model” to “Poor Product.”
In most cases, someone built a business around something that people
had asked them to create or because they thought it would be a good idea to
invent that solution. That is not enough validation. Not even close.
Here are a few reasons why:
You built a solution for customers who think they have that
problem under control. You solved the wrong problem.
You developed a solution that helps only at the margins. You
solved the wrong problem.
You built something, but your customers have bigger fish to fry.
You solved the wrong problem.
You want to build a “need-to-have” instead of a “nice-to-have.” You
want to develop a painkiller instead of a vitamin. You want to be their
aspirin.
How can this be done? By finding their most important problem: the
one issue that is critical to their success.
The Critical Problem
The most crucial problem a customer faces is on their minds most often. It’s
the most important because it’s coming up frequently and is never easy to
solve. It has the most impact on their lives, but it’s not always the obvious
choice. If you can help a customer with their most critical problem, they
will benefit the most. No other tool will provide as much value as yours.
You could have a skewed perception of the problems within an industry.
I have a friend who works in real estate due diligence. As an industry
outsider, I always thought he spent most of his time in the building,
checking for correct labels and fire exits. But it turns out that the thing that
eats up his day is not the on-premises work, it’s writing reports. If I wanted
to build a business to help him and his colleagues, I would have gravitated
to making the on-premises job easier. But what he needs is help with his
reports.
You might loathe a particular approach, but other people might love it.
At the beginning of my software development career, I hated writing
documentation and writing reports. I would never have built a
documentation-based product 10 years ago. I would have come up with
many reasons why that just wouldn’t work. But thankfully, I have
broadened my mind since then. That’s why I ended up building and selling
FeedbackPanda, 
essentially 
a 
report-writing 
and 
documentation-
maintaining product for online English teachers. Some people might love
doing the things you dislike. Don’t dismiss that.
Here is how you can tell if a problem is a critical problem.
A Critical Problem Is Painful
Problems can be a nuisance. They come up, and you either deal with them
or ignore them. We can’t ignore critical problems. They persistently make
the lives of those who have them harder until they are resolved. They can’t
be just ignored, because they consistently reduce the quality of life.
For FeedbackPanda, this was true because teachers would spend more
than two hours every day just writing student feedback. Those two hours
spent writing feedback were two fewer hours available for their children,
families, and other activities.
Find the critical problem where ignoring something causes a lower
quality of life.
A Critical Problem Wastes Time or Money
Some issues are challenging but not wasteful. If you’re a writer, you will
sometimes spend a lot of time thinking about your ideas, but it’s never
pointless to intellectually refine your work. That’s very different if you’re
writing a report that you’re required to produce, particularly when you’re
sure that no one is ever going to read it. You must get that report done, but it
feels like a waste of time and effort. A critical problem often feels like it is
a waste of precious resources while being mandatory.
For FeedbackPanda, this was true because while the time spent on
writing student feedback was unpaid, producing the feedback itself was
mandatory. If teachers did not send in their feedback within 12 hours of
teaching the students, they wouldn’t even get paid for teaching. Often, the
parents would not read the feedback.
Find the critical problem at the intersection of something mandatory
and something wasteful.
A Critical Problem Is Not Optional
Some things can be ignored or delegated, but a critical problem can’t be. If
it’s critical, people will have to deal with the problem every time it occurs.
They can’t just opt out of it. Solving the problem is essential to making any
kind of progress in the work.
For FeedbackPanda, this was true because teachers had no choice. They
had to provide feedback within a half-day, or they wouldn’t get paid for the
time they spent teaching. Every time they taught a student, feedback was
mandatory.
Find the critical problem where people would love
to opt out, but can’t.
A Critical Problem Occurs Frequently and Repeatedly
The reason why critical problems are always on the minds of your
customers is that the problems happen so often. Every day, every week,
every month, the critical problems repeatedly occur. For your customers,
it’s always the most urgent thing at that time. The issue needs to be solved
there and then, every single time. If it’s not frequent, it is likely not a
critical problem. If it occurs repeatedly and isn’t easily solved, it is likely to
be a critical problem.
For FeedbackPanda, this was true because teachers had to write a
substantial amount of text for each 25-minute lesson they taught. Many of
our customers taught 20 or more of those lessons per day. For them, this
critical problem appeared 20 times per day, and they needed to write
engaging messages every single time.
Find the critical problem where people need to do the same thing over
and over again.
A Critical Problem Takes up Too Much Time
If a problem can be solved quickly, people either solve it the moment it
appears or they set aside some time to do the work in a batch later, without
feeling like it’s a waste of time. If that is the case, the problem is not really
critical. Only when you need to spend considerable time and effort each
time you solve the problem will it be impossible to “just” deal with it.
“Doing it later” also turns into a chore, as it may take hours or days to deal
with a long queue of deferred problems. A critical problem will feel like an
unwelcome chore: important, yet tiresome.
For FeedbackPanda, this was true because writing feedback for the
parents of a student required a lot of mental effort: remembering the lesson
contents, how the student dealt with the work, and what could be done to
improve for the future, among other things. Anyone doing that after
teaching for 10 hours non-stop would be mentally exhausted.
Find the critical problem where solving a problem takes a long time
every time the problem occurs.
A Critical Problem Forces People to Solve It Using Their Own
System
There is the joke that every SaaS is an Excel sheet transformed into
business logic. The moment someone uses generic tools like word
processors or spreadsheets to solve a problem, it’s an indicator that the
problem is valuable enough to build tools. Most problems don’t have high
complexity, and they can be solved on the spot. But a critical issue will be
complicated enough to start developing a system. If your customers have a
pile of Post-its or a chaotic assortment of Word and Excel files to solve a
problem, you may have found a critical problem.
For FeedbackPanda, this was true because we found that most teachers
who taught a certain amount of classes had invented their own systems.
Some teachers used regular notepads to take notes during class; other
teachers had already written feedback templates and put them into Word
files. The most technically inclined had even created simple feedback-
creation tools and forms. A community of teachers had started sharing their
feedback templates in collaborative documents on the web. It was clear that
people were aware that there was a solution to their problem.
Find the critical problem where people are solution-aware and have
already created their own simple systems to solve the problem.
Bonus: A Critical Problem Is Something Companies Hire to Solve
In a tweet, Tyler Tringas (founder of Storemapper and Earnest Capital)
mentions another way of finding critical problems: looking for which
positions companies hire. If they pay a person thousands of dollars a month
to do a job, it must surely be significant.
Looking at hiring is another perspective on the jobs-to-be-done
framework, where the focus shifts from the product to what is important to
your customers: not what is, but what ought to be.
So, look at where your customers want to be. Find the problems in their
way. Clear the path. Build a product that will do this for thousands of
people by solving their critical issues.
Critical Problems and Value
Because a critical problem is so prevalent and has measurable implications,
your customers are very capable of calculating the value of a solution that
solves it. They will be thrilled to pay as soon as paying for the solution is
cheaper than continuing with the status quo.
They’ll be willing to pay:
if the solution saves them time
if the solution saves them money
if the solution makes them money
If it does all three at the same time, it will be a guaranteed hit. The more
your solution provides along these dimensions, the more valuable it will be.
What Will Happen If the Problem Isn’t Critical?
If you solve a problem that isn’t critical for your customers, one or more of
the following things might happen.
They Have No Interest in Paying
With non-critical problems, customers often find alternative ways of
solving the problem because they want to save money. It’s not worthwhile
for them to look for and pay for a solution that they value less than
alternative solutions. If spending the time to find and learn a free alternative
solution seems like a better choice to your prospects, then your solution is
likely solving the wrong problem, or it’s addressing the right problem the
wrong way.
They Don’t Want to Pay Any Longer
Customers stop paying because they found a solution to a more critical
problem, and they start paying for that, as it is much more valuable than
your product. Your price could be too high (or sometimes too low, as it
suggests a lower value).
Your Churn Is Uncontrollable
Customers 
cancel 
their 
subscriptions 
soon 
after 
subscribing.
Disillusionment, lack of value, giving up, all indicators of a solution to the
wrong problem. If this happens to you, reach out and ask what made them
cancel and what you could have done to prevent that. While this is always
anecdotal, it might show a more significant trend of where your solution is
not fitting their critical problem.
Nobody Talks About the Product
If you provide a delightful solution to a critical problem, people will start
talking about it. If even after many months of providing a service you still
don’t see any word of mouth, you will need to invest heavily in marketing.
That will increase your acquisition costs significantly. If that happens and
there still is no word of mouth happening, you will eventually run out of
money.
Finding the Critical Problem
So, how can you learn about which is the most critical problem your
customers have? It’s quite straightforward: talk to them. Ask them what
annoys them most. Find out where they want to be. Ask them what keeps
them from being the best at what they are doing.
Expect the unexpected. Some problems may seem almost comically
simple to solve, but that may be the preconceived notion of the technician
in you talking. Meet your customers where they are. Some may never have
thought of using Excel to track information that is not numerical. Others
don’t know how powerful a well-designed mobile application can be even
in the hands of a traditional sector like cattle farming. Keep an open mind.
Focus on what you can help them accomplish. Ask what customers
want and which state they want to be in when the work is done. Don’t focus
too much on the “how it’s done.” That is usually more based on tradition
than on an optimized process. Try finding the intended outcomes and then
figure out how to make them happen faster and easier.
Try going into these conversations without a preformulated idea. Go in
empty and soak it all up. Spend your time listening more than talking. As
Rob Fitzpatrick suggests in his book The Mom Test, don’t talk about your
product. Have them talk about their problems.
Take your tech knowledge and try applying it to other fields. Think of
the fact that most people are blind to developments outside their own
industrial bubble. Incumbents often innovate very slowly, and some things
that are tried and tested in one industry are entirely unheard of in another.
Be ready to transfer your skills and knowledge, and expect people not to
understand all of it immediately.
If you find something that will obviously make them significantly more
money or save them a lot of time, then you have something to go on.
Customers should really want to pay for it, almost have a burning desire to
open their wallets. When they ask you if that is possible and you tell them it
is, their mouth should drop to the floor.
If you see eyes widening and jaws dropping when you talk about
solving their most critical problem, then you have the main ingredient for a
great bootstrapped business that can thrive.
IDENTIFYING THE MOST CRITICAL PROBLEM IN
A MARKET
When you’re looking at a niche market, you will find many people have
a large number of problems. However, people will only pay money for a
tiny subset of those: the excruciating problems.
So, how can you find the most painful problems?
You will need to take a close look at the work that is being done in your
niche. You’ll need to talk to people, get them to tell you about the things
that keep them from being where they want to be. In those conversations,
you will want to listen more than you talk.
Painful problems have specific properties that you can look for: the
types of underlying pains as well as the intensity and awareness of the
problems themselves. These properties help to determine what questions to
ask your prospects when you’re trying to find the most painful problem in a
market.
The Kinds of Pains to Look For
Every person experiences some level of the human condition at any given
point of time in their lives: we have aspirations, goals, conflict, struggle,
and hardship. We all have a place where we want to be and things that are
in the way of getting there. That’s where we feel pain. Your job while
researching a niche is to find these pains and where they come from.
Pain can come in a million different shapes, but its underlying reasons
can be grouped into three categories: Time, Resources, and the Self.
Time-Related Pains
Most productivity-related issues cause temporal pain: people feel like
they’re wasting time. These pains are caused by suboptimal processes and
friction between tasks. If tedious work takes a lot of time, it keeps you from
doing important and useful things instead. That leads to time
mismanagement and relevant actions not being taken. By solving the time-
related problem, productive tasks can be accomplished faster and sooner.
When people complain about inefficiencies, tedium, or pointless work,
you’re looking at a time-related problem.
Resource-Related Pains
People hate wasting money. Anything too expensive for the value it creates
is a big problem for the person and the organization. Often, existing
solutions are too costly, which will cause them to feel like a painful
expense. Regulation imposed on an industry can make certain activities
prohibitively expensive, both financially and from the amount of work that
will need to be done. Resources are not just money: capital is only as useful
as the people it’s compensating. Human effort can easily be wasted,
creating a resource drain. Solve these resource-related problems, and free
resources can be allocated more efficiently.
If you hear people complaining about a waste of money, prohibitive
costs, compliance, or the wrong people working on the wrong things,
you’ve found a resource-related problem.
Self-Related Pains
This group of problems is often overlooked. Everyone wants to be notable
somewhere. This can mean holding a position in a company or being
regarded as a supportive co-worker or friend. When people struggle with
achieving these things, they feel self-related pains.
The four essential concepts to look out for here are Reputation,
Accomplishment, Advancement, and Empowerment.
Reputation is a measurement of trustworthiness and expertise. People
want to be regarded as a source of knowledge and reliance. Anything that
creates uncertainty or doubt about someone’s skill can be considered a self-
related problem. You can help people be more reputable by transferring
renown from a trusted source, through certification or credentials.
Accomplishment is a measurement of success and respect. People want
to show to the world that they are good at what they are doing. Anything
that suggests or risks setbacks or failures will be a self-related problem. You
can help people accomplish more by reliably taking over their tedious work
to allow them to be creative and practice their ingenuity.
Advancement is a measurement of progress and alignment. People
don’t want to stand still, and for life-long learners, advancing toward new
opportunities is an integral part of their journey. Helping people advance
could have exciting consequences: in some cases, assisting people in
earning more money may elevate them out of the job they’re currently
doing. Many factors, including political ones, cause advancement problems.
You can help by making sure that the quality of work and access to
information are as good as they can be.
Empowerment is a measurement of meaning and liberation. It is a
second-level version of advancement: helping other people succeed. People
want to support other people, and helping them do that will result in a
higher reputation, build a network of trust and mutual support. Restrictive
permissions and inflexible processes usually cause problems of
empowerment.
Different Levels of Problem Intensity You Will Encounter
Problems arrive on an intensity spectrum. Some are a bit annoying, and
others are excruciatingly painful. An excellent course of action is to note
your perceived intensity for every problem you encounter. To determine this
intensity, I recommend applying the Eisenhower Matrix, which is usually
used for feature prioritization.
The most intense pain is felt when the problem comes from a task that
is both important and urgent. Such a task can’t be deferred or delegated,
which makes it a direct and noticeable pain. If you can solve this problem
for your customers, this is the best kind of problem to have: it will occur
often, needs to be dealt with, and it will be important every single time.
Consequentially, your solution will be required all the time. Even a small
improvement over the status quo will make a product worth some money.
The second-best problems to find are tedious. Those are not as urgent,
but they are important. A solution to this type of problem will still have
high customer retention as long as it makes the job significantly easier.
In third place, we find pressing tasks. Here, it becomes difficult for
people to justify spending a meaningful amount of money on a solution.
There could be valid reasons every now and then when time is particularly
tight, but mostly, resources are better allocated to essential parts of the
work. Your service will either need to be very affordable or do an extremely
remarkable job of getting the pressing work done faster.
Finally, there are the annoying little issues. Services that solve non-
important and non-urgent problems are likely to be regarded as a luxury,
and their costs will be scrutinized at all times. Most people will just do the
work when they find time for it, often delegating or indefinitely deferring it.
Targeting such a problem will lead to high churn and high customer
acquisition costs. Nobody pays you to find their remote when it falls down
the back of the couch. They will just find it themselves.
You will want your product to be the main course instead of a side dish.
You want your service to be the last subscription that gets canceled when
budgets are shrinking.
Do They Know? The Problem with Problem Awareness
When you’re conducting interviews with customers, you will hear them talk
a lot about the problems that bother them. These are the known knowns.
But your prospects will never be able to tell you about the issues they don’t
realize they have.
At FeedbackPanda, we ran into this situation right at the beginning.
Some of our prospects were not aware that the time they were spending
writing the same texts over and over again was a problem. They had gotten
used to doing this over the years, and it had become a regular part of their
routine. It took us a while to notice that these people would not be actively
looking for a solution, because they thought they didn’t have a reason to.
We fixed this by spreading awareness of the problem. Our early
customers helped us a lot with that, speaking out on social media about how
they felt this to be a problem and how happy they were that someone had
solved it for them. Over time, this turned unaware teachers into enlightened
customers.
The Prospect Awareness Scale by Eugene Schwartz from his seminal
1966 book Breakthrough Advertising provides an excellent introduction into
customer awareness levels.
You start with the Completely Unaware. They don’t know that they
have a problem, they don’t think of solving it, and they don’t know that
your product exists.
They turn into Problem-Aware once they notice that something is not
working as it should. They still don’t know how it could ever be solved.
Once they do, they are Solution-Aware. They know that somewhere out
there, someone has a solution. They have heard that their colleagues use
services to solve their problems, but they don’t know which services.
Product-Aware prospects know which services exist in the market, and
they are looking into which one is right for them.
Finally, the Most Aware know exactly what you’re selling, they know it
will solve their problem, and they’re now just waiting for a good deal.
What does this mean for you, the entrepreneur, who is looking for a
critical problem to solve?
It means that while the Problem-Aware will be a great source of
potential problems, the Completely Unaware should not be overlooked.
Many problems are known to the people in their industries, but the
unknowns are just as important.
As a software entrepreneur, you will be transferring your skills and
knowledge from one domain to another. This will be beneficial to the
detection of these unknown unknowns. People who work in a specific field
without ever looking outside it will develop occupational blindness. They
don’t find much opportunity to take an outside perspective, leaving
significant detection gaps in the spectrum of problems they perceive.
How to Find the Unknown Unknowns
Where do people go out of their way not to do a certain job without
describing it as a problem at the same time? Where do people “automate”
their jobs with tools that, from your perspective, seem inadequate for the
task? Where do they build makeshift solutions?
The moment you find people organizing data in Excel without making
use of the numerical features of a spreadsheet, you are in the presence of
problem avoidance.
You will find that Excel and Google sheets are widespread for these
“custom solutions” that people build for themselves. If you see folders
overflowing with Word documents, you’re looking at something very
similar. When the more technically inclined take their makeshift solutions
to the cloud and cross-link a bunch of documents only to email links and
files to their colleagues, you can be quite sure that there is a problem they
themselves might not be aware of.
Remember: users avoid, entrepreneurs solve. Find the things that your
prospects steer away from. Find the things that make them feel
uncomfortable. Discomfort is a very clear indicator of a hidden problem.
Other Places to Look
You want to be the business that is in the right place at the right time. But
what about all those who tried this before you?
What about those who were in the right place at the wrong time? What
about businesses that found a critical problem and built a solution only to
find that their audience was not ready for it? It’s likely that someone,
somewhere, had taken a shot, failed, and moved on.
The challenge is to find their traces. This is best done by flat out asking
industry insiders about failed attempts at solving problems. Do they
remember the names of products that turned out to be a flop? You could
even get the name of people who have since moved into different industries.
Keep pulling that thread, and you may find a subject matter expert with a
lot of entrepreneurial insight into your chosen niche.
What about the businesses that were in the wrong place at the right
time? Are there adjacent or comparable industries where a service has
solved similar problems? What can you learn from their products and
solutions? Reach out to those entrepreneurs as well, as they might have
transferable knowledge that you can apply to your niche without
encroaching on their territory.
Find the latest popular books released in your niche. Read reviews and
summaries, or read the whole book if you have the time. You’ll find
concepts and ideas that might not yet have been implemented as a service.
This is particularly true for academic papers and articles.
Follow the leaders. In social media, follow the thought leaders and
influencers in your niche. See what they are saying, hear what they are
complaining about, and read the conversations they’re surfacing. Are they
saying something controversial that gets a lot of pushback from the
incumbents? That is an opportunity for progress that you can facilitate. You
can also look into what is being said about competitors to find out what’s
lacking about existing solutions.
About Competition and Expertise
Don’t mind competition. There is always a way to create a better product,
and find a more fitting solution to a problem that people complain about.
They would not complain about it if there were a perfect solution. Your job
is to build just that. Competition is a frame of reference, a reflection of the
status quo. As an entrepreneur, that is only one of many inputs into your
product decision.
Great products happen at the intersection of your skills and the
opportunities of a niche market you care about. Make the most of your
transferrable knowledge. People in the niche are often not even aware of
things that are perfectly normal to you and other entrepreneurs. Basic tools
for you may be godsends for others. Suspend your views of what is
“normal” and “ubiquitous” when you engage in problem discovery. You
will find things that have pained your prospects for years that could be
solved within minutes.
What Questions to Ask a Prospect
Which questions would you want to ask your prospective customers to
figure out their pains? Here are some suggestions to find problems, the
underlying reason, and the roadblocks that will need to be pushed aside.
Efficiency
What keeps you from being more efficient at work?
Why can’t you do more of what you do?
Which tasks feel like they are a drag?
Effectiveness
What limits you from doing your job the right way?
Which tasks are the most pointless?
What annoys you about working with competitive products? What
is your experience like with each of them?
Financials
Where are you spending too much on tools?
Where are you spending too much on consulting?
What is your budget for software tools?
What is your budget for outsourcing work?
Reputation
What parts of your skill set do you need to work on?
Which parts of your job do you hesitate to start?
How do you show your colleagues that you’re an expert?
Empowerment
How can you help other people succeed?
Do you share success?
Is lifting up people something you are expected to do?
Accomplishment
How do you celebrate your victories?
How much do others see of your work?
What’s in the way of your next big success?
Advancement
What would it need for you to climb the career ladder one more
step?
Where do you want to be professionally?
How can you reach financial security and stability?
Where do you see yourself growing toward?
What challenges did you have in your professional career so far?
What challenges do you have in your professional career at this
point?
Avoidance Detection
What part of your job do you loathe?
What tasks do you delegate the most?
What tasks should not be part of your work?
Is there anything that seems utterly needless in your day-to-day
work?
If you wanted to shock the whole industry, what would you change
about it?
Problem Awareness
Which is your most pressing problem?
Which is your most painful problem?
Which is your most tedious problem?
Other Places
What products were introduced to the market that ultimately
failed?
Was there ever someone who wanted to solve problems for you?
What happened to them?
For any question, listen intently to their answer, then probe for and write
down the problem, the intensity, the underlying reason for the problem, and
their awareness of both problem and solution. Make a list for every single
prospect you call, and merge all of those lists, counting problem occurrence
for every problem that was mentioned multiple times.
When you’re revisiting this final list after the conversations, rank your
notes by descending intensity. The most critical problem will be on the top
of that list. It will likely have been mentioned a few times, too.
You will still need to validate the problem with your prospects, which I
suggest you do in a follow-up call to a random subset of them. This allows
you to verify that the problem is real, they are or have become aware of it,
and they are interested in solutions.
Assuming that you have validated your audience and made sure that
your niche can support your business, you have now found one or many
critical problems that are very likely to allow you to build a sustainable
bootstrapped business.
Pick the problem that you feel most passionate about.
Now you can begin working on your solution to that problem.
PROBLEM VALIDATION: TALKING TO THE
RIGHT PEOPLLE
“Talk to your customers,” they say, “because that’s the only way to
build something people want.”
The collective wisdom of the bootstrapper scene is not wrong. But
talking to your customers is only half the truth. It’s just as important to
speak to the right kinds of customers as it is to ignore the rest. We had a
number of these conversations at FeedbackPanda, both for validating
problems that would impact our main product and our integrations.
Your goal in every problem exploration and validation conversation is
to find your prospective customer’s problems and figure out which ones are
critical. But what is their goal? What motivates them to have this
conversation with you?
They may want to be supportive, leave a good impression, show their
expertise, or just try to get a better price. People will be selfish in many,
often unexpected ways.
Make sure you are talking to someone who is aligned with your goals. If
your customer’s goal is not conducive to finding their critical problems, you
risk getting further away from problem validation while they get what they
want. You can only sustain your business if your goals are aligned with
theirs.
How can you learn more about their underlying goals and aspirations?
You won’t be able to detect this before you talk to them. That only leaves
the actual conversation: you will have to observe your problem validation
conversation with them, discover if they are a good or bad fit, and only act
on the interactions that show signs of goal alignment while discarding the
others.
The Best-Case Conversation
The best case is an in-person conversation with an industry expert who has
skin in the game and is aligned with your goals.
You want an in-person conversation. Calls are acceptable, too, but face-
to-face interaction allows for more presence and will enable you to detect
emotional distress and confusion better. The important part is that you can
reliably and immediately steer the conversation toward problem validation,
should it be derailed. For this reason real-time video communication is
preferable to text-based or asynchronous approaches.
Keep in mind that it’s a conversation, not an interview. This kind of
research is not about getting measurable answers to pre-fabricated
questions. It’s about extracting and discovering problems. It will be a
different conversation every time.
Your prospective customer should be an expert in their industry. They
don’t need to be a leader or influencer, but they should know a lot about the
industry. There is an argument to make for interviewing the whole spectrum
of skill levels, as your product might be useful to any stage of expertise.
However, the likelihood of surfacing interesting problems is higher if you
interview an expert: after all, they have gone through many of these stages
before ending up where they are now.
Having skin in the game means having something to gain from using
better tools and having something to lose if you don’t. You want a prospect
that needs to be a winner in their industry. If they don’t care about their
work, they won’t care about their problems either, thus being a sub-par
candidate for your problem validation efforts.
How to Prepare for a Problem Validation Conversation
To prevent misleading communication that may confuse your customers,
you will have to focus on how humans communicate. You will need to
introduce ideas indirectly by asking about the validity of the underlying
problems. Better yet, don’t introduce your ideas at all, but guide your
customer toward exploring the problem space surrounding those ideas
themselves. If you seed your ideas, you will taint the explorative nature of
the conversation. It’s like giving away the ending of a book too soon. All of
a sudden, the discussion will be steered toward your idea instead of
exploring problems.
Don’t talk, just listen. Ask a lot of questions, but don’t go into
explanations. In a problem validation conversation, the customer is the
expert. That holds true even if you know you are more knowledgeable
about their industry than they are. In the future, you will need to convince
them and their peers to buy your product. Your expertise will make no
difference if your prospective customers don’t think your product solves
any of their critical problems.
Prospective Customers
It’s usually hard to find and reach out to prospective customers. Often, you
will need to employ cold outreach strategies. I found that if you have to do
cold outreach, you can still do it through a luke-warm channel. If you are
already close to your prospects by hanging out at their water cooler, their
social media groups, or communities, place a message that you will be
reaching out to respected members of the community to do some research.
That sort of primer has two effects: first, some people might reach out to
you and ask to be interviewed. Second, people will have a point of
reference when you send them an email, having previously read about it
within the trust context of their community.
After that, call. Use video chat if you can, even if it’s just you on the
screen. Make time to build a connection with your prospect. If they don’t
have time for you, ask them to connect you with someone who does.
You can also find people in two other gathering places: industry
conferences, where conversations are usually quite formal; or meetups,
where informal chats are possible, and you will find a less censored version
of people’s perspective on their industry. Both these events allow you to
have face-to-face conversations with industry experts, and introductions can
be made on-the-fly, without having to go through email or phone calls.
At FeedbackPanda, we combined these. Danielle organized a teacher
meetup on the same day a teacher conference happened in Chicago, and she
invited our customers to come after their conference day was over. Free
drinks and FeedbackPanda swag were waiting for them. The result was that
she met many of our customers, many of them well-connected in the tribe
of teachers that were our audience. Those connections led to many warm
introductions down the line.
Avoid People Who Are Trying to Please You
Compliments are a problem. They don’t help you. If compliments happen,
ignore them. If the customer continues to compliment everything you do,
the data will not help you.
You can salvage these types of conversations. Dive deep into problems
and their implications. Completely ignore any of their opinions about your
product, your ideas, or your plans. Focus exclusively on their day-to-day
operations, and redirect all talk of your product toward their experiences.
Whenever I had a conversation with a customer that was overly
passionate about telling me that everything we did was perfect, I would be
grateful without encouraging further compliments. A “Thanks, I’ll let the
team know” often satisfied their desire to show gratitude, and it would help
to steer the conversation toward a more neutral place.
Avoid People Who Have No Skin in the Game
If your prospects don’t have access to the budget or have no impact on the
decisions made in a business, you will not get the full picture. They may
surface new problems, but if you can’t learn about the perceived value of a
solution for those problems, you could build a product that is not generating
enough overall value for people to purchase it.
Ideal candidates are enthusiastic about where things are going. They
want to participate in the change that makes their industry better.
If they don’t seem to care about their problems or are apathetic, you will
see a distorted perspective on their jobs. Imagine a worker who knows that
they’ll quit a month from now. Will their viewpoint on which problems to
solve for them right now be aligned with creating a product that solves
long-term issues for their business? Wouldn’t you rather talk to someone
who plans on having a career in that industry for years to come?
If you run into such a prospect, ask for introductions. Ask them to
connect you with a peer or superior that could help you explore and validate
problems in the industry better and with more in-depth insight.
We didn’t have a lot of those conversations, but the few that we had
were over reasonably soon. Don’t be afraid to stop the conversation, thank
them, and move on. If they don’t care, they’ll be glad to be left alone.
Avoid People Who Only Tell You Their Ideas
You are validating a problem, not your customer’s assumption. If they are
barraging you with their ideas, you will be limited to the outcomes of their
perception, not the reality of their problems.
Customers have a hard time understanding what they truly value, so
their solutions are limited to what they know. Experts can be blinded by
years of routine, overvaluing the status quo, and undervaluing even
paradigm-shifting improvements.
But you can get something out of these ideas. Ask your prospect why
they thought of them. Have them tell you the steps that led to the idea, note
the assumptions, and ignore the idea itself. Within those assumptions, you
will find hints of problems, and those can be useful for your exploration of
the problem space.
I’ve learned to deal with the idea-dispensing kind of customer through
the day-to-day conversations I had doing customer service. That gave me
lots of opportunities to redirect the flow of the discussion toward the
underlying problems while acknowledging their idea with a “We have
added this to our list of ideas," and “We’ll discuss it during our next feature
design meeting.” Statements like this will let your customers understand
that you won’t be creating this feature anytime soon, but you are aware of it
having been suggested and are now vetting it. This perception can be used
to then immediately dive into the reasons for them recommending it, as
your customers will feel involved in the vetting process at that point.
Avoid People Who Love Complaining
In some cases, you will run into a customer that will find fault with every
single imaginable thing. They will complain about their work, their boss,
their colleagues, the impact all of this has on their lives, and even about the
tools that were made so that they could have an easier time.
While within those conversations, you can find good problems to work
on, they will be buried under an avalanche of nuisances and annoyances.
Digging through this heap of irrelevance may not be worth your time.
Try salvaging these conversations by severely limiting the scope of your
questions and their answers. Ask them to name the most important thing,
the job that takes them the longest. Prime them to look for the extremes.
If you had a conversation that, in retrospect, seems biased, do not act on
it. Write down what led you to suspect bias, and use this in future
discussions to end them once you detect it again. It will feel like a waste of
your time, but dismissing information is a necessary part of validating
problems.
Important Things to Consider
Avoid quantitative methods like surveys. They will not allow you to dive
into underlying reasons, and your questions will limit the scope of the
replies you can get without allowing you to steer the conversation.
Finally, read up and try to be aware of cognitive biases in your
conversations, both in what you are saying and how your prospective
customer responds. If possible, record the conversation and do your
analysis a few days later, when you can have a fresh look at it. You’re
building a long-term business, so a few days are a fair price to pay for
having a neutral perspective on the essential step of problem validation.
STEP THREE: YOUR SOLUTION
A SOLUTIONS ISN’T A PRODUCT… YET
With a worthwhile audience and a validated problem, you will now
need to find a solution. A solution is not the same as a product—yet. A
solution is a more general answer to the question “How could this be done
better?” A product answers the question “What do I use to deal with it?”
The nuance here is in being specific enough to solve the problem without
locking yourself into a corner by building the first possible solution that
comes to mind.
For example, let’s say you have chosen rural hairdressers as your niche
audience and have validated that their critical problem is dealing with
winter cancellations because their customers get stuck on snowy roads.
Something will come to your mind as a great solution. You may think of
helping them manage their booking, so it takes into account local weather
data and routing information. You may think of letting the customer quickly
inform the hairdresser when this happens so they can reschedule. You may
think of automatically rescheduling appointments when snowy days are
expected. All of these solutions could probably make a meaningful impact
on the lives of your customers. None of these solutions are products yet.
They could become apps, services, processes, web applications, or just new
ways to operate a business. You need to validate the solutions you find to
choose the one that has maximum impact.
SOLUTION VALIDATION DOESN’T HAPPEN IN A
VACUUM: TALKING TO YOUR FUTURE
CUSTOMERS
Entrepreneurs are good at coming up with ideas. We envision solutions
to the problems that trouble the audience we have chosen to help. We think
deeply about a problem, mentally shape a product, and see how much it
would benefit the quality of life. Then we get to work and build the
prototype, eager to release it as soon as possible.
But just like the problems we work on, we need to validate the solutions
we create. Working on an issue that isn't critical for customers is risky, as it
could result in a product no one needs. Working on a solution that doesn't
work for customers has the same consequence. That's why solution
validation is an essential step before we dive into creating the product.
Solution validation is best done in direct communication with your
prospective customers, just like when you validated that the problem you
were going to work on was a critical one for your niche audience. Call up
your prospects again if you can, or find new potential customers, have a
chat, and ask them a few questions.
The main question you want to answer through these calls is, "Will this
solution solve the problem as expected, and won't it create more problems
along the way?"
These calls will be different from the product validation calls you did at
an earlier point in the Preparation Stage. This time, you will have to talk
about your solution. As an introduction, explain what it would do, what
steps your customer would have to take, and how you envision it to be part
of their work. You will need your customer to understand how your service
would be used in order to set them up for the questions you'll ask to validate
your solution.
In asking these questions, you'll be making a risk assessment. Usually,
when you look at risks that could come from using a particular service,
you'd look at the severity of impact, the likelihood of occurrence, and the
probability of detection of each potential risk. You'd then list each of the
risks, ranking them by some sort of risk class classification. While this is
often overkill for single-purpose services, it helps to make sure you build a
reliable, side-effect-free product.
To be able to find these risks, you will have to ask a few leading
questions and pay close attention to what your prospects have to say. There
are two significant perspectives I suggest taking here: workflow impact and
jobs-to-be-done.
Workflow Impact
Your service will never be used in isolation. It will always be embedded in
some sort of workflow, one tool among many to solve a particular problem
that occurs as a result of an action and that, when solved, will allow for
follow-up actions to be taken also.
Workflows can differ wildly between your customers, but there is likely
some common ground. Your job is to find out what that shared experience
is and how your solution fits for the highest number of customers.
A good question here is, "At what stage of your workflow will you be
using this solution?"
Answers to this question serve two purposes. They will validate your
assumptions about where you expected your product to be used. More
importantly, they will also uncover the stages of your prospect's workflow
in which you didn't expect your service to be used. If you find a significant
number of prospects mentioning a stage you missed when envisioning your
solution, you can immediately get back to the drawing board and
compensate for the oversight.
An example of this phenomenon occurred when we validated a solution
for a FeedbackPanda integration into a teaching portal software that our
customers used to teach. We reached out to a handful of customers
expecting our desktop-only integration to solve the job of creating student
feedback right where they would teach, only to find that many of them did
their feedback later in the day from their phones or tablets. If we hadn't
asked at which stage of the workflow they would need our solution, we
would have served them insufficiently. As a result, we built a mobile
application as well as a desktop-based integration.
It may also be the case that your service will be used at multiple stages
of your prospect's workflow, and it could be used differently at each of
these stages. Knowing this will allow you to either focus on one of those
stages exclusively or to make your service detect the stage at which it's used
and present a dedicated interface.
At FeedbackPanda, the needs of a teacher varied significantly
depending on if they were initially creating a piece of feedback or if they
were editing an existing student report later throughout their day. For new
feedback, the focus was on the lesson content and prior feedback that had
been written for the student. For existing feedback, the focus was on meta-
information like ratings, parent responses, and overall statistics. The display
component for student feedback detected this difference of intent and
offered different user interface components depending on the stage of our
customers’ workflow.
Looking into the stages of the workflow allows you to develop a better
and more in-depth understanding of how your customers handle their day-
to-day activities. It will show you opportunities for features and integrations
that you may miss if you only focus on the specifics of your product. Of
course, you should still build a product that does one thing well. But it
won't hurt you if your service plays along nicely with the tools that are
already used by your audience.
Jobs-to-Be-Done
This brings us to the other perspective you should take: how does your
solution impact the jobs-to-be-done?
The concept of JTBD is a helpful framework to look at what ultimately
drives people to do work: not what is, but what ought to be. People are
result-driven, and they use technological solutions, not for their intrinsic
quality but to get a job done.
It also means that for every problem that your customers are aware of,
there may already be a solution in place to get that particular job done. That
solution might be crude, and it can take a surprisingly high number of
shapes.
Just imagine a scenario like this: there's a computer in a data center that
needs to be rebooted once a day. How many different ways could this job be
done?
1. A developer could write a script to restart the computer after 24
hours of running.
2. The intern could walk over to the computer every day after work
and press the restart button.
3. Some remote management software could log into the computer
every day and reboot it using simulated mouse movements and key
commands.
4. The CEO of the company could make it a ritual to do this job every
day, showing that they still work on the small stuff.
5. A system administrator role could be created to take care of this
job and many other similar infrastructure-related activities.
Do some of these solutions sound bizarre? Definitely. But you can bet
that all of them are being actively employed somewhere to solve a problem
as simple as rebooting a computer.
This list also shows that the cost of solving a problem can vary wildly.
Automating the job may cost a couple of minutes of your developer's time,
but creating the new role of the system administrator to deal with these
kinds of problems suddenly impacts the bottom line significantly.
That's why it's crucial to find out what's in place to solve the problem
right now. You need to know what or who you are replacing. Every existing
solution has a cost attached. You will need to figure this out for your own
pricing.
The example with the CEO is supposed to illustrate that there are three
kinds of costs. So, the question you need to ask is, "How much does the
existing solution cost in terms of time, money, or damage to 'the self'?"
It's excellent if using your solution can save a business some money.
But if it alienates a CEO from their self-perceived connection with the
company, you will have a hard time selling it to them. Understanding the
emotional impact of changing from an existing solution is an integral part
of the solution validation process.
Another vital question to ask is, "Could this solution cause friction in
unexpected areas?"
The point of this question is to find hidden dependencies. Imagine
you're selling a CRM to small logistics businesses like door-to-door
delivery companies. You're trying to replace the chaotic piles of Excel
sheets and Word documents that they have been using to keep track of their
customers in the past. Your solution will take care of this, but you're
carefully validating it, so you ask about where else they are using Excel
sheets. It turns out that a majority of your customers have an Excel plugin
to deal with their fleet management and driver tracking. If your solution
does not take into account this integration, it will add more friction to their
process instead of removing it.
If you don't ask how far the current solution to the job-to-be-done
extends into the operation of their business, you will miss critical friction
points that need to be addressed by a solution that is worth switching to.
Sometimes, this requires a lot of digging. The person you're talking to
may not be aware of how their colleagues use the current solution, and how
far it may have crept into other processes. You will want to talk to multiple
people working with the current system to increase your chances of spotting
those risky friction potentials.
How to Talk About Risk
From your prospective customer's perspective, using your service should
remove risk, deal with the jobs-to-be-done more efficiently, and make the
overall workflow smoother.
To be able to assess that, you have to spell out the risks clearly when
you're doing your solution validation. Remember that this is not a sales call;
you're not trying to trick them into ignoring risks to their business. You're
validating your proposed solution so that you can confidently sell it to your
prospects later. Here and now, you are figuring out how to minimize risk
and maximize opportunity.
So, spell it out. Engage your prospects in a lively discussion about their
fears of changing their system. Ask them for previous painful experiences
they had with switching to new solutions, and what could have made those
transitions better.
Think about the kinds of guarantees you can give your users with your
solution. Can you make it reliable enough to offer Service Level
Agreements? Do your customers expect those? Ask them about what kinds
of guarantees the products they already use offer, and how often they have
to make use of those. Depending on the niche, you will find that some of
those guarantees are required by the regulatory environment, while in
others, they are merely peace-of-mind up-sells done by crafty salespeople.
Throughout your solution validation conversations, you want to project
a clear interest in solving your customer's problems without causing new
ones. If you communicate this clearly in each call, you will create goal
alignment between you and your prospect: you both want a great solution
that makes things easier for the customer.
ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTIONS: FOCUS ON
PROBLEMS NOT SOLUTIONS
When you talk to your customers or prospects, you will find that there are
questions that always produce meaningful results: where they are now?
Where do they want to be? What stands in the way of getting there?
Essentially, this is applying the jobs-to-be-done framework to your
communication strategy, trying to find their realistic and aspirational states,
and then building a solution that allows them to go from one state to the
other.
When we're talking about jobs, don't limit yourself to activities or tasks.
Jobs are final states, some form of accomplished goal. They can be solved
with small tools or gigantic systems. In the end, every job-to-be-done is a
chance to evolve a process. It's an aspiration to create something that has a
lasting benefit for your customer's business. A job is someone's struggle to
make their life better.
Look at it from your own business owner's point of view: you don't
want to solve petty problems day-in and day-out, you want to build a
vehicle of growth and prosperity. You're focused on the long-term
perspective, and your prospective customers do the exact same thing. Their
jobs-to-be-done are equally focused on long-term accomplishments: the
things that ought to be.
Focusing on your customers' problems at the same time as envisioning
the optimal state of being will give you insight into the priority of the issues
and what the final product has to allow your customers to use.
That is why you should avoid these kinds of questions:
Avoid asking about features. Your prospects will be primed by
the tools they know, and they will suggest variations of things that
have failed to help them in the past. Why repeat what doesn't
work?
Avoid asking about things that annoy them. You will drown out
the bird's-eye perspective if your prospects have to dive into the
vast ocean of daily annoyances. You're after the big problems of
their whole industry. Don't get distracted by tedious minutiae.
Avoid asking about their strategies and tactics too much. While
there is something to be learned from how your customer
approaches solving their problems, they are results of highly path-
dependent choices made in the past. You don't want to know what
was. You care about what is and what ought to be.
So, what should you ask about?
Ask about where progress is hindered. Progress is a clear
indicator of jobs-to-be-done. After all, you have to move from
what is to what ought to be in some way. Progress is that transition.
Ask people where they perceive it.
Ask about tension and friction during value creation. Where are
things harder to accomplish than they ought to be? That is why
your customers want to use your product.
Once you have found hindered progress, tension, or friction,
discover the underlying needs and desired outcomes of the
processes involved. Ask about the context of the job-to-be-done:
who is involved, who holds the stakes, and who is ultimately
responsible for the job-to-be-done?
Ask these questions, have these conversations. Find your customers'
jobs-to-be-done, and then envision solutions to the problems that cause
those jobs to be left undone.
The winning solution, and finally your product, is a result of those
conversations, not apart from them. Treat conversations at this stage as a
competition of ideas. In fact, “solution validation” may not be the best way
of looking at it after all. It’s about finding the most impactful, most value-
producing solution with the least amount of friction and the highest possible
chance of adoption into your customers' existing workflow.
STEP FOUR: YOUR PRODUCT
IT’S TIME TO GET YOUR HANDS DIRTY
Finally, and only after looking into the audience, problem, and solution,
can you arrive at the product. This is the part that the technical expert in
every entrepreneur finds most exciting: turning the idea into a real thing—
manifesting the potential into a tangible product. Only by having spent a lot
of time and energy on shaping the idea through the previous stages can you
be sure that when you dive into building the product, you can create a
sustainable bootstrapped business by selling it to customers who will pay
for it.
In the startup world, everyone is talking about the MVP, the Minimum
Viable Product. There is an ongoing battle over what that means.
To some, it's the first, very embarrassing version of the product that
works. It's a prototype, the first version of many, a bundle of core features
built with rudimentary aesthetics to quickly get the product out there. Their
MVP will lack a lot of parts, and many things will still have to be done by
hand.
To others, it's something they can be proud of: a polished system, well-
designed, and with a heavily tested user interface. Their MVP has to do
almost everything the final product will be doing.
No matter where you stand on these issues, there are a few general
guidelines that will make sure you can create a product that stands a chance:
1. Your product will never be finished—treat it as an ongoing concern
at all times.
2. Allow for quick and safe releases, release early, and release often.
3. The less exciting your tech choices, the better.
4. The fewer things you have to build yourself, the better.
With an MVP, you want to test the waters, and you will want to be sure
that you can make money on the most basic version of your product. What
"basic" means will be up to you, but there is a saying attributed to Reid
Hoffman, founder of LinkedIn: “If you're not embarrassed by the first
version of your product, you have launched too late.”
THE MYTH OF THE FINISHED PRODUCT
Before the internet made transferring large amounts of data cheap and
easy, software used to be distributed on CDs or DVDs. For any given
application, there was the "Golden Master," a final version of the software,
ready to be copied millions of times.
Those days are over. Every day, millions of software updates get
dispatched. For many services in the bootstrapped world, customers will
never notice: they'll just refresh their browser pages, and the latest version
of the application will just appear.
With updating being so easy, no product is ever finished. Even when
you release what you think is a “feature-complete” version of your product,
it will only be "done" for a while.
There is one main reason for all software being only temporary: the
changing circumstances of your customers. It can manifest in many ways,
for many reasons: 1) as entrepreneurial dissatisfaction with the status quo;
2) a reaction to movements in the industry, the competitive landscape, or
the regulatory environment; or 3) a reaction to changes in needs and your
understanding of your customers.
Being able to update your product quickly can still be optimally
leveraged for your bootstrapped business, but it’s important to also know
when not to change things.
Entrepreneurial Dissatisfaction
Every product is the result of a measurement made at one point in time: you
validated your audience, their problem, and your solution. You decided on
the scope of your product from that information. But that data isn't static. It
wasn't even complete when you went through all of those validations.
In short, your analysis will always be imperfect, because you don't have
the complete insight: there is no perfect vision in the ever-changing world
of entrepreneurship. Your interpretation of what is needed to solve your
customers' critical problem always will be incomplete, or a premise may
have changed over time.
What matters is what you do about it. Your vision of the product is the
touchstone of what should be in your product and what shouldn't. If your
vision changes, so should your product.
It's a good idea to reflect on your assumptions, your analysis, and its
accuracy every now and then. I recommend doing this consciously at least
once a quarter, as a form of Continuous Validation of the business, the
product, and alignment with your vision.
We did this in a very informal way at FeedbackPanda. Every few
months, Danielle and I would sit down and talk about the feature
suggestions and ideas we had come up with or received, and checked if
anything among them was interesting for making the product better. We
dismissed much more than we considered, and it kept the product current
without being bloated. We even removed features at times.
Your product will never be finished because your audience and their
problems are moving targets that you learn to see more clearly the longer
you work at it.
Changing Regulatory Environments
When the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) passed into law in
May 2018 in Europe, companies all over the world frantically added cookie
consent banners to their websites. They started implementing data
protection features into their products, because all of a sudden, there was a
chance they'd be fined heavily if they didn't change their products.
We had been careful not to collect any potentially dangerous
information with FeedbackPanda even before GDPR was announced, as I
felt we should avoid having payment information or customer address
information stored in our database. I trusted that services like Stripe or
Auth0 were more capable of securing this kind of information than I could
ever be. As a result, we didn't have to do much, other than adding a pesky
cookie consent banner to our marketing website.
In some industries, there are already extensive protocols to follow: you
need to be PCI compliant when you work in payments, or you need
documentation for HIPAA compliance, for example.
Some markets are relatively unregulated when you start, but are targeted
by lawmakers eventually. We witnessed this in the Chinese EdTech
landscape. Our mostly North-American customers were contracting for
Chinese Kid English companies. When Chinese authorities decided that
Chinese children could not receive after-school tutoring after 8pm and
restricted the amount of information the schools were allowed to share
about the students, the Chinese Kid English companies had to change their
product and business models significantly. Some companies even closed
because the regulation made it impossible for them to operate at a profit.
Your product can never be finished because the legal requirements and
limitations of an industry are always changing.
Changing Technology Landscape
There are domino effects that can impact your business in surprising ways.
Here is another FeedbackPanda example that illustrates the dependencies
and complicated interconnected parts of the software world.
The Chinese Kid English companies our customers worked for were
using web-based teaching platforms to facilitate video-based face-to-face
teaching. Our product FeedbackPanda integrated into these platforms using
a browser extension.
Everything was getting along fine—until it didn't.
In 2017, Adobe decided to end-of-life Flash, its popular multimedia
software and browser plugin. The maturity of web technologies like
HTML5 and WebAssembly made it less and less appealing to support an
outdated plugin, so they decided to stop supporting Flash by the end of
2020.
Consequentially, browser vendors had to react. The security
implications of this decision reached far and wide. Before the end of 2020,
all major browsers would have to phase out their Flash support, as
integrating software that is not receiving security updates is a great risk for
browsers, which are used by millions of people every single day.
So, the team at Chromium, the technology behind Google Chrome, set a
roadmap to phase out Flash support over several years. One particular step
along the way was disabling the flash plugin by default by July 2019. After
that point, the user of Chrome would have to reactivate Flash every single
time they started the browser.
When this change was a few months away, the developer community
started talking about it. Within the development teams of the Chinese Kid
English companies, it must have made the rounds as well, as all of a
sudden, these companies understood the complexity of their tech choices:
the system they used for video calls was built on Flash. And, if they didn't
change anything soon, their teachers could not teach reliably any longer,
and would not be able to teach at all by the end of 2020 when their browser
would automatically update and disable Flash support.
One choice was to switch to a different video call technology provider,
finding one that used HTML5 video, something that would continue to be
supported.
But they did something else. The schools chose to stick with their video
provider. The problem now was the nature of evergreen browsers,
automatically updating eventually. Instead the schools went for something
that we didn't expect: they froze their teachers' browsers in time by having
them teach through an Electron-based application. Using Electron is like
shipping a web application packaged with a browser to run it. And with a
package, they could stay in control of the update process, effectively
freezing their teachers' Chrome version in a pre-2020 state forever.
Problem solved for the Chinese Kid English companies. They now had
to release updates both to their website and the teaching application that
would load their site in that old browser version, but the Flash issue would
have no impact.
For FeedbackPanda, it was the opposite. By moving away from a
browser-based teaching portal to the Electron-app-based solution, our
browser integration would not work anymore. Within this Electron wrapper,
browser extensions could not be installed, which was a limitation the
schools chose to accept for not having to spend millions changing their
video call provider.
For us, it meant that a major integration into the workflow of our
customers was at risk. The schools were actively encouraging their teachers
to teach through the app, and without having ever planned to do so, I started
researching ways of integrating browser extensions into standalone Electron
applications.
I finally found a solution that would allow our customers to integrate
the same way they already knew from their browsers into their new
teaching apps. This integration involved another standalone Electron-based
app that our customers would have to install and use. Hence, it wasn't as
easy as installing an extension in a browser, but it still was much better to
have a few extra steps than not to use our service at all.
This kind of change could happen on a schedule as it did with Flash. It
could also occur from one day to another, as it usually does when Google
releases an update to its search engine algorithms and puts an entire niche
out of business.
Your product can never be finished because it's embedded in a world of
changing technologies.
Changing Customer Workflows
When industries adopt new and improved practices, workflows change.
There are four kinds of changes in a sector that can trigger this, which can
be differentiated along the two axes of "Are the core activities threatened?"
and "Are the core assets threatened?"
First, you have the one with the lowest chance of making you change
your product: progressive change. Core activities and technologies stay
mostly the same over time; only minimal change happens. Think of airlines,
an industry that has changed very little over the last decades. If you have a
product that integrates with the systems of this industry, it will not need to
be changed much over time.
Second, there is creative change. In the movie industry, technology gets
improved because there is a desire to become better and create things that
are new and exciting. New technology can change whole areas of the
industry very quickly, and that adoption comes with a change of how things
are getting done. Assets are being developed and improved, leaving the
activities mostly the same.
When only core activities are threatened, we call it intermediating
change. Here, the fragility of interpersonal relationships leads to changes in
how things are done: look at how car dealerships used to work and how
much has been changed by technology and ubiquitous information. The
power dynamics of a sales relationship have flipped, and so have the
processes in the industry.
The most dangerous kind of change is radical change. Here, both
activities and assets are threatened, and everything can change. Have ever
seen a rotary phone, and wondered what happened to the businesses that
produced those? Remember travel agencies? When people book vacations
today, they rarely use a phone much less leave the house. Travel agents
have to approach marketing and sales much differently today. If you have a
product that helps travel agents make sales or coordinate travel plans, you
will have to react to seismic shifts in your industry and provide solutions to
the problems of today.
Your product is never finished because changes in the industry you
serve will change the workflows of your customers, forcing you to adapt
your product.
Changes in the Economic Impact of a Feature
There is also the possibility that a change to your business or product has
significant side-effects that will turn something that worked well before into
something harmful for your business.
The example of Baremetrics introducing a freemium plan illustrates this
clearly. They made available much of the functionality of the paid
subscription levels to free accounts in the hope of finding more leads and
have users see the value proposition more clearly. Soon after launching the
free plan, the free users started to outnumber paid users and the amount of
data that Baremetrics had to process started causing performance and
database issues. Customer support was doubly affected: there were all these
new freemium customers to support, and the paying members needed help
solving the problems caused by the performance issues.
Their churn went up, their revenue didn't hit the expected goals, and
they called it a failed experiment. But for both the freemium attempt and for
turning it off eventually, they had to change their product. Ignoring the
changes they had to make as they ran into scaling issues, this is product
work that was not in the initial vision, but needed to be grafted on at a later
stage.
If a feature of your product turns from lead magnet into a churn
multiplier, you need to remove it. If a feature you previously considered to
be a bad idea turns into a potential revenue increaser, you need to add it.
Your product will never be finished because the economic impact of
certain features is dependent on the choices you make after or before
implementing them.
Bugs: Correcting the Dysfunctions You Never Meant to Create
No piece of software will be error-free, because it is built by fallible beings,
operated by fallible beings on complex machines, and consumed by fallible
beings haphazardly operating even more sophisticated machinery. There
will be glitches, and there will be errors.
While it's every developer's ambition to squash these things before they
hit the production systems, some will sneak through, and you will have
customers reach out and report them, often in a very agitated state.
I've learned to use this as a brand-building exercise. When people
reported bugs in the FeedbackPanda interface, I would calmly thank them
for the report, tell them that I was right on it, fix the bug right then, and
immediately tell them that it was fixed right after deploying the new version
of our service. At times, this took less than 30 minutes from the customer
service chat until the fixed version was deployed.
This reliably resulted in amazement and, in some cases, even converted
the customer from a mere user to one of our loudest evangelists. Being
heard is one thing. Being listened to and finding that something is made
better as a result is another. If you can give your customers this feeling, they
will feel valued, understood, and will become loyal. Many of those
customers would rush to our aid whenever we had technical trouble, telling
people on social media about their experience and that they knew we would
do everything in our power to restore the service. This gave us precious
time to fix the problems instead of talking to customers in a variety of
social media groups.
With every bug you fix, your product becomes better—as long as you
don't introduce new bugs by fixing the old ones.
Three Ways to Think About Features
I see three distinct approaches to features: you can add them, you can
change them, and you can remove them. But one of these is often
overlooked.
Most founders love to add new features, as they often equate features
with the potential of generating value. Whenever new customer needs get
discovered, you add a feature. When you want to start value-nurturing your
customers, showing them how much they benefit from your product, you
add a feature that does that. When you want to turn your product into a
network-effect engine, you add a sharing feature.
Founders are also happy to change and adjust features when needed.
When customer needs change, you change your features. When your
business is moving up-market or down-market, you adjust your
functionality.
Only a few entrepreneurs are happy to remove features from their
products. Even when customers don't need a particular activity anymore,
the feature is left untouched. Even when a feature was built to solve a need
that turns out not to exist, it stays in the product. Even when a feature is
clearly damaging in terms of economic impact, we don't remove it
immediately.
Why is that? What makes us so hesitant to remove what we can see isn't
working? It's the thing that makes an entrepreneur great: boundless
optimism. Here, it's just applied the wrong way and mixed with an
unhealthy dose of the sunk-cost fallacy. That fallacy states that we perceive
something as more valuable than it is when we have spent considerable
resources in creating or attaining it. We would rather "see it through until
the end" than counting our losses and getting rid of it.
If you have a feature that no customer uses, remove it. I did that with a
very specific button in our interface that we had put into the product as a
means for our first few users to migrate their data, before we had
integrations into their online classrooms. The button in question would
allow them to assign a unique ID to a record that we couldn't detect before
the integration, but the ID would be automatically assigned and used when
the teacher had the browser extension installed. After a few weeks, all
teachers were effectively migrated. Still, it took me months to remove that
button.
And when I removed it, a single user immediately complained about it
being gone. In an utterly unexpected way, they had started using our
product with their own self-designated IDs for their records, which had no
impact on our system, but was a means for them to add more information to
their data. When we removed the option to change that information, they
started complaining.
It gave us a good insight into how some people could be using our
product in unexpected ways. Removing features will do this; it will unearth
the hidden outliers, the users deviating from the conventional path. If you
have a feature that is damaging to the value of your business, remove it.
At some point, I envisioned that we should be able to show each teacher
extremely detailed statistical information about their data, right on
everyone's dashboard. But with thousands of teachers having thousands of
records, the calculations involved were very resource-intensive, not unlike
the Baremetrics example mentioned before. I had to cut back on displaying
this information on the dashboard and moved it into a separate component
that would only load and calculate data when a user requested it
deliberately. Crisis averted.
Finally, if you're building a network-effect-based product and you find
that a feature discourages your users from participating in the network,
remove it. This friction can severely impede the growth potential of your
product. Remove all obstacles and extra steps that keep your customers
from engaging in network-building activities.
While you will likely be adding and changing features more than
removing them in the early stages of your business, prepare that eventually,
you will need to remove features. Avoid becoming too attached. You may
be reluctant to remove something you spent a lot of time on. However,
you'd rather have a slim and focused product than a behemoth that does a
thousand things, but none of them well.
The Kind of "Finished" You Never Want to See
The only time when your software is actually finished is when it has
precisely zero users and no changes to respond to: when your business has
failed. That will be the day when you can stop looking at your market and
your customers' needs. Any other day is an opportunity to improve your
product.
Your product will never be finished. It will need to adapt to things
within and without your control. Leverage the fact that it is easier than ever
to deploy a new version of your product quickly and give your customers
the best experience you can provide.
THE DO’S AND DON’TS OF THE MINIMUM
VIABLE PRODUCT
Leonardo da Vinci said, "Art is never finished, only abandoned." This is
definitely true for software as well. The only antidote to abandonment is to
put your work in front of other people, even when it's not perfect yet.
The startup industry uses the term MVP (Minimum Viable Product) to
express this in-between state of being both a wonky prototype and a good-
enough product for public consumption.
If software can never be truly finished, any stage of it is your best guess
at what it should be at the time it's created. As the MVP is the first version
of your product that your audience will be exposed to, it is crucial to get it
"right enough" while being okay with it not being "perfectly right" at the
same time.
The MVP is your first real contact with your customers. It has two main
functions: to allow your early adopters to gauge the value of your service,
and to enable you to charge them money to gauge their sincerity. The MVP
is the first handshake between you and your customers. To have your MVP
leave a great first impression, you will need to scope it sufficiently and time
it well.
Scoping Your MVP
There are two boxes to tick when it comes to your MVP: it has to be the
minimum of what is needed to make your product viable.
What's a minimal product? It's the core functionality only, a simple tool
without any fancy additions.
What's a viable product? It's the essence of the solution to your
audience's problem, a tool that does exactly what it promises to do, and
nothing more.
Both "minimal" and "viable" limit the scope of your product, from
different directions. You can always make your product more viable, but
you can't make it any more minimal without losing your customer.
A minimum viable product should contain a few structural components
to make it usable by your audience: your users should be able to sign up and
log in, solve their problem, and be able to pay for your product. Anything
else is cruft, at least for your MVP.
Depending on the technical skill of your audience, you can get by with a
rudimentary interface. If you build a tool for developers, an API and some
documentation could be enough. For customers who need a bit more than
that, you will have to provide a well-designed interface.
Luckily, creating a well-designed interface is easy for an MVP: if you
only solve one core problem, there won't be much potential for confusion.
Every interface component you put into your MVP should lead your
customer to your core functionality. If you find yourself having trouble with
your interface and user journey, you may have too much non-critical
functionality in your MVP.
Your MVP should be a "Mafia Offer," something your customers can't
refuse because it's too good to pass up. You can accomplish that by focusing
on achieving the "minimum viable" part of your MVP. Solve one critical
problem really well. Don't do anything else. If there is nothing to distract
your customers from seeing the value of the product, you have succeeded.
Beware of reacting immediately to early customer feedback. Your MVP
is particularly prone to the core problem of software engineering:
requirement volatility. Your prospective customers will expect different
things from their tools over time. Worse yet, they may not know what they
need, or they may have internalized their work too much to adequately
express what their requirements are. Some customers will tell you what
they think you need to hear instead of telling you what they know.
All software is an imperfect approximation of a solution to a less-than-
well-defined set of requirements. Your MVP will be, too, and that is fine. It
just has to prove that your core functionality solves your audience's critical
problem well enough.
One last thing about the scope of your MVP: beware of platform
overextension. Don't try and build the very first version of your product for
all possible platforms it may be used on and for. If you build an app, find
the audience that needs your product most, and build for their platform
alone. Your app MVP doesn't need to be available for iOS, Android,
BlackBerry, and Windows Phone at the same time. One of these platforms
will fit your product best. Build for that one.
For FeedbackPanda, we tried to find the most important platform and
build for that. Since the product was a web-based SaaS for online English
teachers, that meant something slightly different for us: choosing the right
online school to integrate with. We integrated with the most significant
player in the market first, tested, and went for the rest much later. The
system we chose before all others was the one we knew most about, and
that helped us to focus on building the core functionality without getting
lost in the details.
Timing Your MVP
It's incredibly hard to time when your MVP is done. Here's the problem:
you're much too invested. You have the grand vision of what your product
could be. And here you are, looking at a version that is slimmed down to
the extent of being unrecognizable. It will always feel like it's not good
enough yet.
Here is how you can reframe this perspective: all your customers want
is to have one less problem in their lives. They are sitting in front of a bowl
of soup with a fork. You have a tiny spoon to offer, but you think you could
make a much larger spoon. Your customers will be perfectly happy with the
small spoon, because no matter what it can do for them in the future, it will
already help them with their bowl of soup, right here and now.
The happy path for any customer is to ship the MVP as soon as
humanly possible. You need your customers to interact with your product at
the earliest possible moment. Only then can you find out what works and
what doesn't. You need the MVP to become part of their daily workflow.
That will surface interaction conflicts and feature inconsistencies better than
any reflection ever could.
Understand that your first users will be early adopters and innovators.
They understand that new products are not "done" and that using an
imperfect product will still be better. Early adopters are aware of their
impact on the trajectory of a product, and they will play with something that
doesn't work perfectly much longer than a mainstream customer ever
would.
Ship early, and release to early adopters. If you can get them to use your
MVP and actually commit to it by paying you a non-trivial amount of
money, you will have a real shot at building a sustainable business.
Features a Successful MVP Should Have (Eventually)
If you want it to measure customer commitment, add a rudimentary
payment system from the beginning. Give liberal amounts of free trial time,
but set an end to it. An indefinite trial period could keep people around, but
it won't allow you to determine if your product produces enough value to
warrant paying for it.
If your first customers only stay with the product because it's free, you
do not know the viability of your future business. If you offer a subscription
and people start signing up, you know you're onto something. If they don't,
then you have something you can ask them about.
Security and privacy should be present in your MVP from the
beginning: don't ingest personally identifiable information more than you
need to. Use Identity-as-a-Service solutions like Auth0 from the start, and
don't implement your own payment system either. Services like Stripe will
handle capturing payment and billing information in a PCI-compliant way
for you. In general, don't keep secrets in your database. This burdens you
with being very up-to-date with security standards and software updates,
which are not core parts of your business. It also makes your small business
a lucrative target for hacking, and this puts you personally at risk. Avoid the
whole thing by having experts do this for you.
We found one thing to be incredibly useful in the MVP and all later
versions of our product: client-side monitoring. By getting notifications for
errors immediately after they happened in the browsers or apps of our
customers, we could see the stack trace and additional information before
the customer even noticed the error. On quite a few occasions, I had already
composed a customer service response while the affected customer was still
typing their initial message. Reaching out to a customer before they have
even thought about talking to customer service is one of the most effective
ways of delighting a customer in a situation that is typically negative.
It’s also important to provide a way for the customer to reach you. Give
them an easy-to-use contact form, a real-time chat solution like Intercom or
UserList—just make sure they have some way to reach out to you when
necessary. You're interested in their feedback as soon as they have
something to tell you. Make that easy for them to accomplish.
None of these features have to be part of your MVP from day one, but
they should eventually become part of it in some form or another. You can
do a lot of the work manually for a while, working with basic tools such as
spreadsheets, email, and even phone. But eventually, you will want to
funnel all the activities through your (soon-to-be-)automated systems.
MVP “Cheats”
It is extremely helpful to build a product that solves your own problem. You
will know when your MVP is minimally viable since it will solve your
problem enough at some point. From there, it will be good enough for
others as well. This practice is called "dogfooding," named after a television
ad from the 1970s, where the owner of a dog food brand claimed that he fed
his dog food to his own dogs. In the IT world, this process has been made
famous by Amazon, where Jeff Bezos forced all his development teams to
build internal APIs that would eventually be made available to external
developers, too. That way, all external services would have gone through a
long time of internal use, ironing out the bugs and making the interfaces
usable.
Another way of thinking about your MVP is to make it a Minimum
Loveable Product. What is the first version of your product that an early
adopter may take a screenshot of and share with their network? What
features do you need for a user to have their jaw drop to the floor? What
configuration will make it crystal-clear how much time or money they can
save by using your product? Getting your MVP to the point where your
customers have no choice but to talk about it is what the MLP is all about.
A Few MVP Examples
One of the finest examples of a successful MVP is EndCrawl, a SaaS in the
movie industry, providing end-of-movie credits. John Eremic, the founder
of EndCrawl, worked in movie post-production for almost a decade, and he
found that every production company had trouble with their movie credits.
He wanted to build a service to make this much more manageable.
The EndCrawl MVP was a Perl script that John had built at his
breakfast table on a Saturday morning. It ingested a pre-formatted Google
sheet that the movie company would edit with their information. Every time
they needed a rendered version of the credits, they would just send an email
to EndCrawl, and within 15 minutes, they would receive a link to the
finished rendering—a process that had usually taken between six and 24
hours previously.
This is what an initial MVP looks like. It is minimal. It's just a Google
sheet and an email. It's viable. It solves the customer's problem. It's
loveable. It solves the problem surprisingly quickly. With EndCrawl, the
full SaaS UI came later. It wasn't required to validate the product:
production companies were happy to pay $500 to interact with an API
through email. And that's all your MVP is required to do.
Joel Gascoigne of Buffer took the two-page MVP route. Buffer created
a landing page which explained what their tweet-scheduling tool would
allow a user to do, and would show an email signup page if someone
clicked the “Call-to-Action” button:
This validation strategy was enough for Joel to see that there was some
interest in a tweet-scheduling product, and he wanted to learn even more
about his customers before building out the functional MVP. He added a
page in between the landing and the email capture, and asked prospects to
pick a price level they would be interested in paying, together with a free
option. This resulted in some interest in paid plans, which was an indicator
that tweet-scheduling was something people would pay for. That was good
enough to build out the first version of Buffer, a product that was the
foundation of an incredible bootstrapped business.
If It Fails, Don't Throw It Away
Like everything in the beginning stages of your bootstrapped business, the
MVP is mostly a tool for validation. Expect that some of your customers
will not like your MVP for some reason, and your job is to find out why. An
MVP with acceptance problems has not yet failed; it's just incomplete.
Understanding where the customers have trouble making use of your
product is required to make it more accessible.
Sometimes, however, you may have created the right product for the
wrong customer. In this case, start over, but don't throw away what you
have created. Your future business or someone else may be able to salvage
your MVP and turn it into a flourishing business for another audience.
In general, you will have a choice: you can adjust your MVP to solve
the problem better, solve a different problem for your audience, or look for
another audience. I recommend trying to salvage your MVP before
scrapping it altogether. However, at some point, you may want to call it a
day and look for greener pastures.
I have done this many times before with products or ideas that didn't
survive the first contact with the audience they were intended for. It hurt
every time, but whenever it happened, I understood that I had just learned a
valuable lesson about what I thought reality would be like and what it
actually turned out to be. Every time you have to correct your perception of
reality, you're inching a bit closer to your customers' truth. And that is
where you will be able to serve them eventually.
If your MVP causes your customers to pay for your product, great. You
have validated that you're on the right track. You can now focus on turning
it into a business.
If it doesn't result in paying customers at all, even after a few iterations,
great. You have validated that you were on the wrong track, and you won't
be pursuing that direction any longer. You just saved yourself from trying to
build a business that won't resonate with customers.
Validating that you are on the right path is why you build an MVP.
Either success or failure of the MVP will allow you to become a better
entrepreneur.
HOW TO RELEASE AS A BOOTSTRAPPER:
OFTEN, EARLY, AND SAFELY
Like Leonardo Da Vinci, we said, "Software is never finished, only
abandoned." While this is true, it doesn't tell us anything helpful. So, we
can rephrase this into something we can act on: "Software is never finished,
only released."
In most cases, technical founders will be able to do Cowboy Coding,
which means that they have full control over the development and
deployment process. It also means that reliable systems are not sufficiently
established, as things are "done the way they are done," particularly in the
beginning phases of a startup.
If you want to set up your release process in a future-proof way from
the beginning, here is what is most important about releasing your product
in a bootstrapped business: release often, release early, and release safely.
That way, your engineering and release culture will allow you to be
nimble, react to customer feedback quickly, and build a stable infrastructure
for the essential asset of your business: your product.
Release Often
When I worked for a VC-backed startup at the beginning of my engineering
career, we would release expansive feature sets, sometimes months apart at
a time. As a result, I would work on many different small features. There
was a lot of extra work whenever one developer's code conflicted with
another developer's, and the days following release day were full of
customers reaching out about problems—all at once.
You can prevent this by releasing more often. At FeedbackPanda, I
released almost daily, and at least once a week. Whenever a feature was
done enough, it would be released. I didn't wait for a release day; I just
made sure I wouldn't release while most of our customers were using the
product, which was a three-hour window I would usually avoid for anything
that was not a bug fix.
Releasing often prevents horizontal overengineering. You won't
work on too many features at the same time. In the best case, every release
is precisely one feature, with all of your focus going into getting it right the
first time. By releasing at least once a week, you will force yourself to
concentrate on a minimal number of things. This focus on single features
allows you to build many small things over time, one after the other, and
immediately validate if they are useful or not. If you bundle them up into
one big release every few months, your validation data will lose a lot of
accuracy and granularity.
Releasing often allows for feature implementation feedback. You
can learn very quickly how well the released feature solves the problem it's
supposed to solve. Since you've delivered a single feature, you will be able
to attribute any unexpected side-effects to your release. Many client-side
error-monitoring tools can assign a suspect release to every new error,
making an educated guess as to which deployment may be responsible for a
newly encountered error.
Releasing often allows your product to evolve progressively. No
change will ever make a customer think that "everything has changed."
Customers get used to your release cadence, and they will have a much
easier time integrating small changes into their workflows.
Don't forget to keep your documentation and Standard Operating
Procedures up-to-date. For engineers, it's a lot of fun to build, and a great
joy to see customers use newly released features. The part where you take
new screenshots for your knowledge base and write new step-by-step
guides for your Operations Manual may not be as exciting. But those steps,
when taken routinely, will make sure your business runs on as much
automation and documentation as possible, which will make it more
sellable in the future.
Release Early
When I released a feature of FeedbackPanda that would allow our teachers
to share their feedback templates with each other, I released a crude version
that took me two days to build. It worked only for one of the schools we
supported, it had a very basic interface, and all our customers could do was
find a shared template and import it into their database. This feature
eventually turned into what we called the FeedbackPandaCloud.
After we released the feature, our most adventurous customers started
using it, and they reached out with both positive and negative feedback.
They explained at which points in their workflow they found this feature to
be an improvement and where it confused them. A day later, I had
addressed many of those initial concerns.
The next iteration of the feature happened a good week later. In the
meantime, I deployed several bug fixes and small improvements to other,
more integral parts of the product, some of which were related to the
interface components used in the sharing feature.
Releasing early prevents vertical overengineering. You won't work
on one feature for too long. After you release a feature, you're free to work
on something else. Not focusing on one feature for too long prevents going
down endless rabbit holes, which is a big concern for many solo founders.
It will also make your features very succinct. By releasing when
features are just a few days old, you will effectively be releasing MVP
versions of individual features. You won't have months to fiddle with
irrelevant details if your feature needs to be good enough in three days.
Releasing early allows for feature integration feedback. Your
customers can tell you very quickly how well the feature fits into their
existing workflow. This is great because every feature you release will need
to be tweaked in some way, eventually. Since you want to provide the
maximum amount of value to all of your customers as fast as possible,
getting valuable feedback early in the lifetime of a feature is a significant
advantage.
If you work for months on a feature only to find out that you
misunderstood the nature of your customers' problem, that is a month
wasted. If you can find that out after working on the feature for just four
days, you saved yourself three weeks. That's why releasing early is
important: it frees up time for other, equally or more critical opportunities
of creating value for your customers.
Releasing early allows for features to evolve progressively. You will
make small changes to your features over time, responding to real-world
usage and customer requirements. No battle plan survives contact with the
enemy, and as expert as you may be as a founder, the expert in what your
customers need will always be your customers themselves.
Iterating your features is a good practice because you will need to make
changes anyway, either from customer feedback you receive or when you
learn something new about the workflow of your customers. The chance
that you can release a feature once and never touch it is slim, and the
changing nature of both your business and the needs of your customers will
make you revisit your product often.
If a feature is lacking a critical component, you will learn about this
very quickly. In the case of our FeedbackPandaCloud, people requested a
way to edit templates before importing them into their own database. Since
I had started building the feature with a skeleton functionality, I could easily
add new features later.
It's not just customer requirements that make this progressive approach
attractive. In some cases, your features don't need to be full-fledged because
it doesn't yet make sense for your business. When I integrated a
subscription payment system into FeedbackPanda, all I needed for the first
couple of weeks was a way for people to subscribe. The first public version
of our service had a subscribe button only. There was no option to cancel or
upgrade a subscription. Customers had to reach out through our customer
service channels. Only after a few dozen customers had expressed the need
for specific functionality would I implement it and release it. Bit by bit,
plan upgrade and downgrade, cancellation, and invoice-related functions
appeared in our product; I only ever implemented these features when it
started taking too long to solve these tasks manually.
Release Safely
When I released a feature that was supposed to show every customer a few
statistics about their usage of our product, I didn't think that this would
impact our service much. After all, what were a few additional requests to
the database? All of a sudden, my monitoring tools started bombarding me
with notifications; my phone rang from the robocalls that I had set up when
our system became unresponsive.
What had happened? It turned out that while I tested my statistic-
collection logic on my local computer on a test account with a few dozen
items in the database, the performance requirements of the database queries
increased exponentially with the amount of data in a customer's database.
All of a sudden, hundreds of teachers with tens of thousands of items in
their databases were refreshing their websites, triggering an unstoppable
avalanche of requests to our database, which promptly locked up and didn't
respond to requests anymore. Our service went down, and when it returned,
the renewed onslaught of database queries caused it to break down again.
I immediately understood what was causing these performance issues.
And, I had to get the service back up and try to keep the downtime as short
as possible.
This downtime lasted for not even two minutes, because I had foreseen
that something like this could happen, and had designed our release
infrastructure to allow for instant rollbacks. With one command, the
previous version of our software that didn't contain the statistics feature was
switched back on, all traffic was routed to that instance, and within a few
seconds, the database had enough breathing room to start working correctly
again.
Never release something you can't roll back. You can't know for sure
that your code is entirely error-free. In particular, when unexpected user
behavior turns a benign feature into a resource-blocking monster, you will
need to get back to the last version of your service that worked. The more
automated this process, the better.
Three main things are important to create a system capable of
automated rollbacks: artifacts, versioning, and bidirectional migrations.
Package your releases into easy-to-deploy artifacts. An artifact is a
bundle, a package that can be easily copied and run on a server, either as
some sort of executable or as a container that systems such as orchestration
tools like Kubernetes can manage. The idea is that everything is well-
specified, and you don't need to move around files or assets. Usually, this
involves a build process, where your whole application gets compiled,
optimized, and packed up so that a final artifact can be created.
Artifacts are usually idempotent with the sources that created them:
compiling your artifact from the same code twice will result in the exact
same artifact. This means that if you want to roll back your service to the
prior version, you don't need to do any compilation again, you can just
reactivate the previous artifact.
Version your release artifacts. You can reliably roll back to a version
that worked if it has an easily discerned version number. If you just released
v1.2.5 of your service and it breaks all of a sudden, you know that
activating v1.2.4 will get your system back to stability. Versioning is a
peace-of-mind activity, and many orchestration systems require it to
distinguish artifacts.
Synchronize your database using bidirectional migrations. Imagine
you have to make changes to your database with a release. You need to
change the name of an important field in your user table that is related to
your authentication flow. Your release goes through, changes the name of
the field, and minutes later, you need to roll back the service to a prior
version. If you don't have a way to revert the change you just did in your
database, likely your service won't start. You'll have to frantically correct
the change manually. Under stress, this can lead to errors from which you
may not be able to recover.
Having migration logic in place that can go both ways makes it possible
to release database-related changes very safely. Many web development
frameworks like Ruby on Rails and Elixir/Phoenix have this feature built-
in, but you need to know how to use it. Making bidirectional migrations a
part of your release flow from the start will save you from a lot of potential
trouble further down the road.
Automate the process. You will benefit immensely from removing
manual steps from the release process. Continuous Integration, the concept
of automating build and tests, makes releasing extremely easy and
manageable. This level of automation makes your business more sellable as
well: if a developer you hire (or the one that replaces you after you sold the
company) can release a new version of the software at the push of a button,
this will net you a premium when your business gets acquired.
An automated process removes the one component that could mess up
more than anything else: you. If you are required to execute steps manually,
you could forget important parts, and risk bringing down your service with
a botched release. An automated build system allows you to have
checkpoints, stopping any dysfunctional artifact from ever reaching your
production system. It's one less thing to think about.
Release when it's a good time. Don't release at the time of day when
most of your customers are using the product at the same time. Often, there
are a few times a day when your traffic is lowest, and those are excellent
release time windows. "Don't release on Fridays" is a famous saying in the
industry, as any corrective work will bleed into your weekend. Make sure
you have the time to potentially roll back or hotfix your release.
Consider slow rollouts and feature flags. This may be an advanced
approach to releasing, as you will likely not need this for the first few
versions of your product. But it makes sense to at least consider building
feature toggles into your product: a way for you to activate and deactivate
access to certain features for your customers. Feature toggles will allow you
to tie functionality to subscription levels eventually, and it will also give
you a way to deal with emergency performance issues. I would have loved
just to turn off the statistics feature that caused my database to break down
instead of having to roll back the release. Slowly rolling out the new
version to our customers instead of just releasing it to all of them at once
would also have given me a much less stressful time figuring out the
performance issues. I started implementing these things shortly after having
experienced the statistics fiasco.
Releasing and TMI: How Much Do You Make Public?
Your customers can find out you released something through two means:
they stumble upon it in your product, or you communicate the change to
them in some way.
For many small changes, you won't need to inform your users. If you
were to tell them every single day that you moved a button a few pixels to
the right or added an image to a block of text, they would soon feel
overwhelmed. Save your announcements for the significant, impactful
features that you want your customers to know about. Blog posts and
newsletters are great places to communicate those.
While product update information has a "push" character, as you inform
your customer directly, you also have the option of a "pull" source of
release update information: offer a changelog. Changelogs can be shown to
customers in the shape of a notification button, which they can click to see
what has been changed recently. For technical audiences, this makes a lot of
sense. For others, it only works when it is informative and helpful. Many
customers only care about things that will indeed affect them. Don't spam
them with the minutiae of your product development. In the end, customers
don't have the attention span to read up on all of your many changes: they
use your product to solve their critical problems. A good approach to
releasing allows for that, and it will make sure they continue to be able to
use your solution to have one less obstacle in their day.
How to Get to a Simple But Effective Release Management
System
Your requirements for release management will vary wildly on the fidelity
of your software. For example, if you run a SaaS with a web app, a mobile
app, and some substantial background computing, you will likely need to
release the backend and the frontend code and artifacts separately, involving
a lot of automation very early in your product’s life. If you run a web-based
SaaS without any extra fluff, you will likely be able to set up a simple
release pipeline and be okay with it for a long time.
As long as your setup allows you to release early and often, you're fine.
The moment you notice yourself doing something that can be automated,
integrate it into your release management system.
When I started developing FeedbackPanda, I ran the prototype locally
on my development machine until it had all the necessary functionality.
Very quickly, I containerized the application using Docker. That allowed me
to fix the versions of all included libraries and runtimes, making builds
more testable and reproducible.
In the beginning, I had all the configuration hard-coded into the
application. There was only my local database, and all the API keys for the
service were unchangeable once the build was running. This was fine for
development but was keeping me from deploying the software to the public.
Making this configuration part more flexible took some time, and it also
meant that certain adjustments were needed to the code to be able to inject
secrets (like the database username and password) into the application from
outside of the container.
The extra effort paid off, as a Docker container can be run on any cloud
provider that supports the industry-standard runtime containerd, which any
major company does. That gave me a lot of options when it came to picking
a hosting provider.
I would still build the Docker images locally on my development
machine, and upload them to a container registry. This was fine until I was
working from a place with very low bandwidth and shaky connectivity. At
that point, uploading a Docker image could take more than an hour, which
is an eternity if you want to deploy a hotfix for a bug that just appeared in
production. Very quickly, I automated away the build step into a cloud build
service, which made it both faster and less dependent on me being
connected to a high-bandwidth line to deploy.
Build the release automation that enables you to release whatever you
need, whenever you want, always allowing you to revert to the last working
version.
THE BORING TRUTH OF SUCCESSFUL
PRODUCTS THAT SURVIVE
Most products that you will see staying on the market have something in
common: they do one thing very well—and not much else. Weber sells
grills that are fantastic at grilling. The furthest they have strayed into new
territory so far has been adding an app-readable thermometer. Still, that
gimmick and anything else about their products is focused on making using
their grills a great barbecuing experience. That's what it is about: having a
barbecue that grills.
In the SaaS space, Stripe is a great example. They provide a clean, well-
designed, programmer-friendly service that allows you to charge your
customers. While Stripe, as a company, offer a few adjacent services, their
focus is always on making getting paid by your customers as comfortable
and low-friction as possible. That also means that they won't offer fancy,
complicated products that integrate into your CRM or Marketing tools. For
that, they started a third-party marketplace. Only when it benefits all of
their customers will they add new features to their core product. Simple
beats complicated.
How can you stay simple?
Simplicity is achieved by reducing complexity or not introducing it in
the first place.
Focus on Doing One Thing Very Well
Every profession has its specialized tools. Doctors operate using specific
scalpels and clamps, plumbers have their pliers and wrenches, and it's no
surprise that the best kind of cutting tool you can buy for cooking is called a
chef's knife.
The best results in your work come from using the best tools at your
disposal. Every professional tool excels at one particular job. As a
bootstrapped founder, you want your product to do the same.
Being laser-focused on creating a product that solves one problem very
well is not just a good idea, it's a requirement for founders without giant
heaps of money. The fact that you only have limited resources available
means that you need to be very picky about how to spend them. Your
money and your time should be put to creating as much value as possible. If
you're working on a professional tool that solves one particular problem and
nothing else, you will always know what to work on.
I'm aware that this is easier said than done. Founders naturally think
expansively: they see something great and imagine it to be even greater.
Software is particularly alluring, as it's so easy to add things. When you
look at your product and your business, think of a chef's knife instead of a
Swiss Army knife. You don't see famous chefs slicing their vegetables with
a Swiss Army knife.
The customers who buy your product also purchase many other
products. Your chances of building a successful business are higher if you
create something that no one else can make instead of trying to develop a
product that does everything.
This is not to say that all-round tools like the Swiss Army knife aren't
useful. But to make a product that does a lot of things really well, you need
a lot of resources and expertise. The chances are that if you are a solo
founder or in a small team, tackling one specific challenge can be
accomplished more realistically.
Keep Your Software and Processes Simple
Simplicity can only be accomplished if every part of your operation is as
simple as possible: your product, your software, your infrastructure, and
even how you go about your daily business. Many of the ways to make your
software product simpler can also be applied to your business processes.
Optimize for Hot Paths
In your software, some modules or functions will be executed more often
than others. If your product is an image-thumbnail-generating cloud service,
the part that resizes user-uploaded files into different ready-to-be-delivered
images will run all day long. If you can speed up this single process by 5%,
your entire service will be 5% more efficient.
When you want to start simplifying your software, look for these hot
paths. It's the low-hanging fruit for optimization. The same is valid for
processes you regularly have to do. At FeedbackPanda, we used to reach
out to our customers manually whenever a charge to their credit card would
fail. We would have to do this every day, at first for 10 minutes. A few
weeks later, this task would take almost an hour. That's when we noticed
that it was ripe for optimization. I built an automation process that would
automatically inform customers about the problem and how to fix it. Only a
few customers would have any additional questions, and we cut down the
time for this task to effectively zero.
Do this with hot paths all over your business: tedious manual processes,
resource-intense tasks, and software components. If you optimize the hot
paths often enough, you'll end up with a very streamlined business.
Ignore Calls for Features
Customers will ask for things. Some of these things will make a lot of
sense. But you're still better off not turning those things into features just
yet. Every customer sees their own problems and envisions a solution
tailored to their needs. Often, this solution conflicts with the perceived
solution of another customer, who is fine with the way things are or would
stand to be confused by any addition.
Everything you add to your product is a source of potential confusion
and friction. Until you can make sure that the vast majority of your
customers benefit from a feature, don't add it.
Consider it, sure. Build a draft prototype if you must, and see how a
feature would impact your product. But beware of releasing it too soon.
Once customers start integrating something into their workflows, it will be
tough to remove, even when it clearly makes things worse.
Beware of edge cases and creating features to solve them. There will
always be new edge cases cropping up, and adding one more feature may
solve the problem there and then, but it will also create bloat that is very
difficult to remove over the long term.
Toward your customers, don't defend or justify your actions. Tell them
that you've noted their request, and you will work on making sure you solve
their problem. Be appreciative that they brought something to light, even if
you don't think it warrants a feature. A customer that reports issues when
they happen is better than one that just cancels their subscription silently.
Changes Should Affect as Many Customers as Possible
Whenever you consider making a change to your product, have it improve
the lives of all users at the same time. If you solve 10 different problems
and speed up one of them by 100%, you will still leave most of your
customers receiving zero benefits from that. If you do one thing only and
speed up your product by 10%, all of your users will benefit from that
immediately.
A small improvement for all of your customers has the same impact as a
significant improvement for a few, and it will compound over time. Every
customer will benefit from that change. Focusing on simplicity allows you
to optimize your product and stay adaptive when things change.
When in doubt, go for the most overall impact. That often means
choosing the harder problem to solve instead of just going for the low-
hanging fruit. That’s good. It's what the competition will go for first,
anyway. Take the thing that is hard to solve, and do that every time. After a
while, you will be so far ahead of anyone else.
Make Your Product Extensible
Software products can be made extensible in two significant ways: by
modularizing them and by making them easy to integrate with.
For your own development comfort, modularize your software. This
will make it easy to add new components later in the lifetime of the product.
Modular software has a high separation of concerns, explicit dependencies,
and well-defined interfaces. Every function is neatly wrapped in a package
or a module that can be tested and maintained independently. This may not
be important when you start, but it will become essential when you start
building a team of developers later.
While modularization is an internal attempt at making your product
more extensible, it's required for external extensibility as well. If you want
others to be able to interface with your service, it will need to expose usable
interfaces. Building modular software will train you to get to the point
where you can interface with other services.
The concept behind external extensibility is simple: let others do the
work. Build a marketplace for plugins into your product, as Intercom does.
Provide an API for your service, as Stripe does. Provide easy-to-replicate
integrations into your service so that users who want to embed your product
into their own product have an easy time doing it.
Often, this involves extensive documentation. This may seem like a lot
of work, but it has two purposes: it will make integrating your service easier
for potential partners; and it will also be an asset for when you choose to
sell your business. A well-documented pile of software and Standard
Operating Procedures with step-by-step instructions and tutorials will work
just as well internally for your employees as they will work externally for
your partners and integrators.
Successful products are the result of focusing on solving a single
problem by providing a lean, long-term-oriented, highly extensible service
that grows better for every single user with every carefully added feature.
NOT IN HOUSE: REINVENTING THE WHEEL
As a bootstrapped founder, you will have to be scrappy. You will want
to spend as little as you can on expenses, particularly when you're just
starting. So, anything you need to do, you want to do by yourself. Anything
you need to use, you will want to build yourself. But in my experience, a
few things should be excluded from that: if you're not careful, they will
blow up in the future, putting the whole business at risk.
Don't Build an Authentication System Yourself
I remember building my first authentication system many years ago while
building the MVP for a startup I was involved in. At that point, I was
building a lot of software using Node.js, and I was aware of several libraries
that would allow me to create this myself. There weren't too many
requirements initially: customers should be able to sign up and log in using
their email and a password, and that was it. My first mistake was to not
spend enough time looking into what authentication really encompasses. It's
not just an email and a password, it's an entire web of interconnected
processes and assumptions.
First, I noticed that I needed to save my users' passwords. Having
worked in software engineering for a while, I knew I couldn't just keep
them as plain text. I looked for best practices and found that I needed to
implement password hashing and salting using the bcrypt library. I
understood that I needed to do this, but I didn't understand why. In the end,
I just followed best practices. This is not the level of security your
customers will or should ever be happy with. You are dealing with their
secret information. They should know that you're doing everything to keep
it safe.
Keeping the personally identifiable information of your customers in
your database is a giant risk, and will make your system a target. There are
entire companies out there that take care of the security and privacy
requirements of authentication, with teams of security experts making sure
the data is inaccessible to those who shouldn't see it.
Other things pointed at the fact that I had bitten off more than I could
chew. After a few days of development, I realized that I would need to build
a password reset process for users to recover their passwords. All of a
sudden, I needed to integrate transactional emails into what was supposed
to be an isolated system. Then, I figured that we were building a B2C
product, which could mean that customers would want to log in using their
existing social networking providers. It took me almost a week to
understand and adequately implement just a few popular OAuth2 providers
as a source of authentication.
Building our authentication system made sense before I had realized the
complexity I was facing. Even if I were to build it myself, it would not be
simple, and definitely not easily maintainable. There were libraries and
plugins to make it easier, but it still meant a lot of work that could have
gone into building the unique core features of our product.
Ever since that experience, I have recommended using Auth0 and their
Identity-as-a-Service offering from the beginning. They have a free plan
that will last you a long time without needing to pay, and even with
thousands of customers, it will still be less than $100. You will save weeks
of development time, and it is a double save: you get to work on your core
product, and you don't have to reinvent the wheel. And your customers' data
is in good hands.
Don't Build a Payment System Yourself
It's bad enough to have personal information in your database, but having
credit card information touch your system offers a strong incentive to steal
that precious information. Use a PCI-compliant processor where the card
information never gets transmitted to your servers, like Stripe. The great
benefit of this is that the payment processors have built-in fraud protection,
which will make it easier for you to avoid troublesome customers.
At this point, most founders are already aware that they need to find a
suitable solution for payments, and rarely roll out their own. I still hear
some first-time entrepreneurs complaining about the fees involved, which
can often reach 3–5% of the transacted payment. While this is a lot, it helps
to think of this as an infrastructure tax for doing business on the internet, a
way to make sure that your recurring revenue will be reliably captured
month after month.
Don't Build an Invoicing System Yourself
In the beginning, it may be easy just to generate your own invoices, as you
have only a few customers and likely only a few plans or prices. But come
tax season, you will find out that you should have added a particular field,
for certain kinds of customers from a specific country. Invoicing is
complicated, and there are dozens of companies that focus on offering a
globally usable invoicing integration into Stripe alone. Leave financial
things to the experts, and focus on your strength of providing a great
product to your niche audience.
I made this mistake with FeedbackPanda, and never rectified it. It
worked well enough, but any change to the system was a pain. Like the
authentication systems I had built myself before, I was not aware of the
complexities that awaited our business. Most of them were not our own
requirements but of a regulatory nature. We had registered our business in a
country where invoices needed to be in numerical order, with no gaps. They
needed to clearly state postal addresses, and they needed to have valid and
appropriate dates as well as specific legal terms.
And then there were taxes! As a German business selling to customers
all over the world, we needed to calculate taxes differently depending on
the location of every customer. Some had to pay Value-Added Tax, but only
if they didn't have a European, non-German VAT ID. The complexity of this
resulted in me building a tax calculation system that was very brittle. With
tax rates changing every now and then, it also needed to fetch the most
recent tax rates every day from a European VAT rate API.
None of this was relevant to the core audience of FeedbackPanda, who
were online teachers. They needed help with their daily operations. The
time I invested in building the start-of-year invoice number overflow logic
(where "#2018-4459" would be followed by "#2019-0001" on the first
invoice of January 1st) alone could have meant a few bug fixes or work on
a teaching-relevant feature instead. It was such a waste of time.
The Mental Trap of Building Things Yourself
As developers, we are very likely to think that, "If I build it myself, I'll
understand it better," and it's true. We do benefit from learning how to solve
these problems, to a degree. The problem is that in a bootstrapped business,
learning-on-the-job should always result in something highly beneficial.
Learning how to build an authentication system like tens of thousands of
other developers have learned before won't make your business any better.
Wasting time on building something that others know the complexity of
while you are entirely unaware is a foolish thing to do. Your core product is
where your expertise lies, it's where you know how much is "enough," and
which steps are required to reach that state. You won't have that level of
insight into non-core parts of your service. Use the services of experts in
those fields.
Wasting time on building something that won't improve your industry
expertise will hurt your business. Everything that makes you more of an
expert among few others will set you apart from your competition. Building
the world's 15,000th invoicing module won't get you any closer to that goal.
The worst part of building things that you don't need to build is that it’s
distracting you from the primary mission of your business: creating a self-
sustaining value engine that helps your customers solve their critical
problem. If you're not focusing on making that a reality, you're straying
from the path.
Building things that you shouldn't build is often the result of a grandiose
underestimation of the time required to get it right enough. For everything
that sounds simple enough to build yourself but has many SaaS solutions
out there, ask yourself if maybe the people who pay for it know more about
the complexity of that feature than you do at this point.
A (Mostly) Unbiased Risk Analysis Framework
It’s important to figure out if you can build a feature that you need, or if you
need to spend money on an existing SaaS solution.
I will try to give you the least biased perspective on the risks for either
choice. They originate from my experiences, reflections, conversations with
other founders, and stories I have read on the topic. For every point, make
sure you find your own opinion and weigh it accordingly.
If you want to make this a data-driven choice, make a list of all the risks
of building and all the risks of buying, then see which list is longer, and
take the other option.
The Risks of Building this Yourself
Building things yourself opens up the possibility of waste and distraction.
Note all the risks that can negatively impact your focus on the core of your
business.
Unexpected complexity: Will building this feature uncover a
different order of magnitude of development cost? Are there
hidden costs in the amount of time you will have to spend on this?
Can you be sure that there is a ceiling? What parts of the feature do
you think could turn out to be unusually complex? Have you
checked for reports of edge cases?
Unexpected compliance: Are there regulatory requirements for
this feature that you may not be aware of? Are there hidden costs
in terms of money and effort to be able to comply with them? Have
you checked the kinds of compliance that solutions in this space
openly advertise? Do they apply to your solution, too?
Distraction: Will building this feature distract you from your
mission, or will it lead you to it? Is your focus going to be on the
core value generation while you build this?
Roadmap littering: Will this feature add more things to your own
roadmap that push the important stuff further out? Is it worth
delivering other features later than anticipated? Are your customers
okay with that? Are you?
The Risks of Not Building this Yourself
Buying things makes your systems more fragile and can result in a lack of
control. Note all the things that could be a risk to the operations of your
business.
Unexpected downtime: How will you react to outages and service
degradations? Will your customers understand this? Do you have
ways to reach customer support for the service you're buying? Will
this cost extra? Is trusting that things will continue working the
only way?
Unexpected implosion: What will you do if this service is closing,
sold, or pivoting to a different product? Do you have a reliable way
of continuing to use it then? Will there be alternatives? Are there
migration paths? Can you build abstractions that are good enough
to change the underlying service in a hurry?
Roadmap misalignment: Does the service have all the features
you need now? Does it have all the features you will need once you
scale? If it doesn't, can you be sure it will have those features at
that point? Is there a chance this service's roadmap will undergo
significant changes in the future?
Finding a Balance
With risks on both sides, how can you make a good decision? I recommend
erring on the side of caution. In many cases, I found that to involve buying
a solution rather than building it. Established SaaS businesses had run into a
lot of the problems that you may encounter long before you even thought of
adding this feature.
Know what you're worth. Do the math and weigh the risks carefully.
Find the big players in the field that you consider building a solution for,
look at their feature set, and see what you think may come back to bite you
if you were to build it yourself. Then, plan how long this would take you to
engineer. Think of where you'll be in five years. Will this solution still
suffice? Or would you rather have other people iron out the kinds and bugs
of that part of your solution?
Buying SaaS solutions won't make your business any less sellable
either: acquirers have come to understand that the value of a company is in
their core offering. Any non-core software they would need to maintain is a
liability. Your business will be better off without hard-to-maintain
components that other people have solved much better and cheaper
somewhere else.
In general, if it's not a part of your core business, consider buying a
solution. This means that you will have a large number of small services
you'll be paying for over the years. That's fine. Every service you pay for is
an overall reduction in the complexity of your solution. Your product
should consist of the minimum logic to maximally solve your niche
audience's most critical problem. Leave everything else to those who care
more about addressing issues like authentication, payment, and invoicing.
Concentrate on the things that make your business unique.
MAKING TECH CHOICES: DON’T ADD RISK TO
A RISKY BUSINESS
As technical founders, we're supposed to choose the technology that
works best for us and our business. But we often let the cargo-culting
around the newest, hottest tech stack get to us. Many technical founders see
a new startup as an opportunity to figure out a modern tech stack. That is a
dangerous move. Not only do you have to deal with the inherently
hazardous nature of creating a new business, but now there is also the
chance that the new and mostly untested tech stack may not be able to solve
the problem you're trying to solve.
The central question of choosing one particular technology over another
is this: "Will you be able to use this well for a long time?"
There are three components to this question: your technical aptitude as a
founder, your ability to use the technology for your particular purpose, and
how you can minimize the chance of having to replace it later.
Founder–Technology Fit
When in doubt, stick to what you know. If you have built your last four
projects with Laravel, the chances are that your business may benefit more
from you getting up to speed quickly in Laravel than spending three months
figuring out how to learn a different programming language like Golang.
With new technology comes new paradigms and best practices, and it takes
a long time to assimilate all this information.
When looking at a tech stack or service, ask yourself if you're able to
evaluate it properly. You may know a lot about building SaaS tools. Still,
you may not have the expertise to judge whether a particular database will
perform better for the specific kind of data and query logic you will need
for your service. For some technologies, you can run a little experiment.
Others you will need to use for more extended periods to develop an
understanding. Ask fellow founders about their experiences with any
particular technology that you don't have any personal experience with
yourself.
It may be tempting to choose to learn a new technology that supposedly
is the perfect fit for your project. In rare cases, this is the right course of
action, because the fit is just too good to be ignored. In most other cases,
however, you're overestimating the technology and underestimating your
own skills. If you can code using one technology, you will be able to build
almost anything using the knowledge you already have. This will be your
advantage. You can jump right into building the product without needing to
learn anything new.
Purpose–Technology Fit
Particularly with newly available technology, you will often only see the
"happy path," the use cases for which the technology has been developed.
This can lead to blind spots in your evaluation: you just don't know what
hasn't been discovered yet. Over time, these solutions will encounter edge
cases and performance problems, which will eventually be resolved. But it's
likely that you don't want to be the one discovering these problems and
having to wait for a solution.
The more specific a technical solution, the more likely it will not be
optimal for any usage patterns that lie outside this particular niche. Over-
optimized solutions could look appealing, but the moment your business
requirements change, you may be left with a technology that is unwieldy
and unable to do the job.
For data storage systems like databases, use tried and tested systems
like PostgreSQL unless your business absolutely needs a different kind of
storage. Postgres has been adopting the right parts of NoSQL and Time
Series databases over the last few versions, so there is no need to
experiment with systems that may not scale well in production. You don't
want to encounter performance bottlenecks because the system you're using
has not been used at a specific scale before.
I have learned to look at generalists more favorably over time. I'm not
talking about one-size-fits-all solutions here; I mean the kinds of
technologies that have evolved from their edge-case-only usage toward
more adaptable products. Redis, for example, is a generalist in the
specialized niche of caching solutions. Most of the time, you recognize the
generalists by the simplicity of the interface they offer. The more it looks
like a collection of simple building blocks, the better.
I've fallen into the specialist trap before. When we started
FeedbackPanda, I was looking for a cloud hosting provider capable of
orchestrating Docker containers. I thought the big cloud providers were not
specific enough with their hosted Kubernetes offerings, so I picked a small
infrastructure startup that promised to allow interacting with Docker
containers through their dashboards and GUIs instead of having to use
command-line calls. I was thrilled and set up our production system on their
platform. For a while, it went well, but then, their service experienced a few
problems. Those little hiccups turned into full-on outages, lasting for hours.
I had no choice but to move our production system onto a major cloud
provider overnight. Ever since then, the system has run without a second of
downtime. The more generalist option of a cloud-hosted Kubernetes turned
out to be the more stable choice. And it turned out I could integrate the
command-line calls much better into our release pipeline than the clicks on
dashboards and user interfaces.
Going with a generalist solution could require more work on your end
initially, but it will also reduce the number of surprises that may wait for
you in the future. Often, generalists have many very different users, and
therefore have to build systems that can handle a lot of different ways of
being used. This results in resilient systems that can be made to fit
individual purposes without making it harder for others to use them
differently.
Technology Durability
One of the worst things that can happen to a SaaS business is when a crucial
part of your tech stack breaks away at a later stage of your business. That is
a risk that you can never fully get rid of, but you can minimize it.
To be on the safe side, choose popular technology. Many developers
using a certain framework or stack will mean that more bugs are discovered
over time, and this kind of software is often very well-maintained. The best
way to quickly find out if a particular piece of software is popular is to look
for documentation and educational resources. If there are a lot of tutorials
and the technology seems well-documented at first glance, it will likely be
around for quite a while.
Look for a vibrant community. I've noticed that in the Elixir/Phoenix
community developers are very engaged, and they love spending time
educating other developers about the intricacies of this functional
programming language and the ecosystem.
When you're new to a programming language or just not as advanced as
you need to be to solve your problem, you will have to learn the lay of the
land before you can dive into building your product: what are the libraries
you will need to use for certain parts? What are the best practices? Why are
things done the way they are done? You'll learn all these things very quickly
if there are excellent educational resources provided by the makers of the
technology and the communities that form around it.
Maturity is also an essential property of good technology. If people have
been using something for a few years, you can expect it to be reliable,
mostly bug-free, and performant both for low- and high-usage patterns.
There are often good indicators for the maturity of a technology: feature-
completeness, ability to integrate with other solutions and workflows, and
the breadth of use-cases it's been tested in. For databases, you will find that
there are some tried and tested options like PostgreSQL, which has been
around since 1996 and is being used in businesses of all sizes, including
Netflix, Spotify, and Uber.
I made the mistake of building a business on an immaturely selected
database once. I picked a fancy, newly developed NoSQL database that was
lauded for its real-time capabilities by the early adopters. What I found out
a few months into the development was that I really needed a relational
database that was performant under a heavy query load. All the real-time
features were irrelevant when I noticed that this new technology wasn't
designed to handle the kind of usage that our application required. I learned
a valuable lesson that day that I carried into FeedbackPanda: for your core
technology, boring is better.
In general, I would advise against learning a new technology stack by
building a business around it. There are two goals here, and they don't align
well: building a stable business that will survive for a long time and
learning a technology that may or may not be a passing fad. This extends to
the services you use as well.
Remember the Docker hosting startups I mentioned above that we had
to migrate away from in a hurry? They exhibited another risky behavior:
uncertainty about the future presence of a service. At some point, after we
had already migrated away, we received an email stating that they were
shutting down the service, with two weeks' notice, urging all current
customers to migrate their products elsewhere. Then, a few months later, we
received another email stating that they'd found a new investor to help them
restart their service. Now they asked customers to come back. While
ridiculously unprofessional, this was an important lesson for me. There is a
real risk in choosing immature services and technologies.
Guidelines to Pick a Technology
Over the years, I have collected a list of attributes that technology should
exhibit to be a good fit. It doesn't have to have them all, but it should hit
more marks than it misses. You'll have enough work on your hands from
serving a niche audience with a likely ever-changing problem. You don't
need to worry about your tech stack at the same time.
Technology that you can use well for a long time has these attributes:
It can be used to solve your problem. You can find stories of how
other businesses have used this technology to fulfill a similar need
to yours. You can evaluate the technology without spending
months of your time.
It's popular. You find a lot of resources and opinions about it on the
web. There are books on the technology for beginners and experts
alike.
It's surrounded by vibrant communities. There are forums, Twitter
communities, whole Slack instances dedicated to the technology,
and they're active.
It's reliable. You can find a lot of established businesses that use it
in their production systems without too many disaster stories.
It's scalable. Small business and big businesses are using this
technology.
It's extensible. You can find a lot of libraries and integrations for
the technology. You can also find information on how you can get
them to work.
It's mature. You can find a history of how the technology was
adapted to fulfill the real needs of the people using it.
It's well-maintained. You can find recent and regular updates to the
service, either in a changelog or in the source code itself. People
who report their problems are responded to, and their concerns
addressed.
It's replaceable. You can find alternatives to the technology that
you can use in its stead should it become problematic or
ineffective.
If a technology you're looking at checks all or most of these boxes, use
it. If not, look for one that does. If you do this for all the choices you will
need to make, you'll end up with a very maintainable collection of
technologies that will stand the test of time.
FROM PRODUCT TO BUSINESS
A WELL-OILED MACHINE
A product is not a business—just yet. That's an important thing to
understand, particularly when you're a technical founder. It's the reason the
book The E-Myth exists: the entrepreneurial myth is that if you build it, they
will come. But they won't unless you put in the effort to create a reliable
system to sell the product at a profit continuously: a business.
A business is more than a landing page, a product, and a bank account.
A business is a complex system of processes. Building a product may come
easy to you if you're technically inclined, but turning it into a value-
generating machine is a whole different kind of challenge. Others may have
trouble coming up with the product but thrive on building the structures
needed to sell it over and over again.
In the initial phase of starting your bootstrapped business, you may
think you don't need processes just yet. I argue that there are a few things
that you should do strategically from the beginning, and turn future
entrepreneurial actions into processes as soon as you can.
I realized this when I read Built to Sell by John Warrillow: a sellable
business is a well-structured business. Nobody wants to buy a business that
isn't easy to run. But you don't actually ever need to sell your sellable
business. You can enjoy the benefits of an easy-to-operate company and
keep it for yourself.
Ever since I understood that an organized business is a sellable business,
I have made every effort to build a well-documented business that my
partner Danielle and I could run by ourselves or hand over to someone else
at any point. We eventually did that by selling the business after two years,
but we could have just hired a few replacements and paid them to keep the
business running.
FORGET GOALS, CREATE SYSTEMS:
FOUNDATIONS OF A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
When you're starting with your business idea, you will be looking at
how successful businesses have accomplished their success. You will see a
lot of different sizes, markets, and business models. But they all have one
thing in common: they've built a system that works. Their long-term and
short-term goals may have changed through the years, but the system that
has kept them running never has. That system is the core of every business.
A sustainable bootstrapped business is successful when you have found
a repeatable, reliable, and resilient system to continuously provide a value-
producing product to paying customers at a profit.
Since "system" is such an abstract term: look at it as a set of rules and
guidelines, like a recipe. To make a tasty omelet, you will need to mix the
right ingredients and cook them for the right time, at the right temperature,
using a specific technique. A business is the same. Having a recipe in place
will make the transition from the Preparation Stage into the Survival Stage
less chaotic. But, it's still important to think of the core growth engine of
your business before you start selling your product to your audience.
A business without goals is an aimless venture. But goals are reached
and exceeded. New goals arrive in their place, and they often change shape
mid-operation. A goal is meant to become obsolete. A system is intended to
endure and allow you to reach your goals in the first place.
Building a Repeatable System
When you're building a bootstrapped business, it will usually be just you in
the beginning. Maybe you have a co-founder or two, but you won't have an
army of salespeople that you can unleash on your audience. Your business
needs to be a one-person-show, and that means you will need to sell your
product to your customers over and over again yourself. For that, generating
revenue needs to be an easily repeatable process.
At best, you're building a way to capture a never-ending stream of
recurring revenue. The optimal situation is when you grow every month,
and your revenue consistently increases. You will have reached that state
when you create a subscription business with negative churn.
In a subscription-based business, churn is the percentage of customers
that discontinue their subscriptions month over month. Churn hurts your
growth twice. For each churned customer, you need to find a new customer
just to get back to a net-zero. To grow, you effectively need two new
customers. Negative churn happens when the customers who stay with your
business spend more time on upgrades than you lose from customers
canceling. That is the holy grail of subscription businesses: when your
churn is negative, you don't even need to add more customers to grow.
Every new customer is a bonus!
But before you can get there, a lot of work needs to be done. You'll
figure out a starting point for your pricing and tweak it over time. At some
point, you will need to offer ways for your customers to upgrade their
subscriptions. You'll need to keep your retention as high as possible and
maximize the influx of new prospects.
All of this is so much easier if the process you need to acquire a new
customer is straightforward and repeatable. That usually means automated
and self-serve. If not, you'll need to make sales manually, which takes away
attention from building your product and creating an automated and well-
documented business that is built to sell.
The fewer steps there are to your process of acquiring a new customer,
the better. Optimally, they come to your marketing content, sign up to your
product, have their "a-ha" moment, and subscribe. Of course, each of these
steps is incredibly hard to pull off, and that's the entrepreneurial challenge.
Fewer steps mean fewer chances of losing your prospect, so keep the
process slim.
Building a Reliable System
Providing a reliable service sounds easier than it is. You may have set up
everything to be well-tested and highly available only to find that your
payment provider has a small glitch that is affecting customers in a
particular state. Or, your email service is being flagged as spam by an email
provider like Google Mail so that all those emails you sent out yesterday
never arrived in your customers' inboxes. These things happened to us at
FeedbackPanda, and we had to find ways to circumvent these issues.
Being reliable doesn't mean being perfect. But it does mean that your
product is built with maximizing availability and performance in mind. No
customer wants to use a sluggish or unreliable product.
This required two kinds of reliability: architectural and operational.
Architectural reliability measures how well your service is designed to
provide uninterrupted access to your product. Operational reliability
measures the effectiveness of your systems to cope with external
interruptions.
For every external service you use, do some research into their support
forums, their status page, or on social media. Find previous occurrences of
service outages, and check how quickly they were resolved. Pay particular
attention to people complaining about not receiving help on social media,
and reach out to them. Ask how they handled that situation. You will learn a
lot about what you will need to prepare for that way.
In any case, create a process for reaching out to your customers when
something goes wrong, because it will. Prepare a message stating that
you're working on it, with an apology and the promise to get back to them
as quickly as you can. Keep this message in a note where you can quickly
copy it. It has two purposes: it reduces the cognitive effort of responding to
customers during an emergency; and it allows your customers to spread a
comprehensive message to their peers, reducing the number of incoming
messages. Nothing is more distracting when you're trying to restore your
production system than hundreds of customers reaching out about your
product not working.
You can hope that you will never have a fatal outage. Or, you can
prepare and build a reliable product and business. It may take some work,
but having the bases covered will give you peace of mind when everything
works fine and when things are a bit rough.
Building a Resilient System
Resiliency is different from reliability in that it looks at your business over
a long time instead of being focused on mere moments. A resilient business
is capable of surviving in an ever-changing market. Today, you may have
hundreds of customers, but some regulations make 90% of them cancel
tomorrow. If you set up your business to be resilient, you will be able to
survive situations like this.
A resilient business is independent. If you have 500 customers, one of
them quitting is not a big deal. If you have five customers, a single
cancellation can cost you 20% or more of your revenue. It's hard to
diversify when you're in a very homogenous niche. You can build resiliency
into your niche product by offering yearly subscriptions, as this will capture
advance revenue that allows you to make the necessary changes to adapt to
different circumstances.
A resilient business is adaptive. If your payment processor shuts down
your account or freezes your funds, your system should be able to integrate
an alternative processor quickly. You have enough data in your database to
restore your revenue: you know which plans your users were on and when
they were supposed to renew. They may need to re-enter their payment data,
but at least the continuity of their subscription is guaranteed that way. The
same is true for authentication. Always have their email address in your
database, even if you use an Identity-as-a-Service solution. In case that
breaks, you can still reach your customers.
A resilient business is extensible. If you can be integrated easily, your
service will become part of the broader ecosystem of tools in your niche.
More and more other services will interact with you, bringing with them a
steady flow of new leads and reputation within the community. If your
processes allow you to quickly build integrations into new and exciting
services in your niche as well, your product will provide your customers
with additional ways of making their lives easier.
Your business and your product should be around for a long time.
Processes and architectural decisions that increase resilience will make sure
it has a chance to endure.
There are several advanced concepts to help entrepreneurs structure
their businesses. While most of them are aimed at larger enterprises, the
Entrepreneurial Operating System (EOS) has been used successfully in
many bootstrapped companies. It aligns and strengthens the six key
components of any business: the alignment between your vision; the real-
world data; your people; your critical issues; your processes that systemize
consistency; and traction to bring discipline and accountability into your
business. It's definitively a good system to look into from the beginning to
see how you want your future business to be structured in the future, what
needs to be prepared, and what kinds of changes you can expect to
encounter.
The Evolution of a System
A repeatable, reliable, and resilient system will need to be continuously
refined and improved. Your customers will change their methods. New
regulations and requirements will need a response. This is the heart of your
operation. It must never stop working. Every day, it must deliver as much as
or more than the day before.
It will take some fine-tuning. You will never be done making sure it's
working correctly. Every time something inside or outside your business
changes, you may need to adjust your system. It doesn't always have to be
bad: sometimes, you will be able to remove a step because a new
technology enables you to fully automate a previously manual action.
As long as you regularly check in with your processes and assumptions,
your system will work for you. When you start feeling some friction where
there was none before, you're starting to work for the system. Reflect on
what has changed, how to respond to it with your current knowledge, and
adjust your process. You've been doing your marketing on Facebook, but
customers come through Instagram more and more? Adjust. Extend your
Facebook campaigns also to be shown on Instagram, or engage a test
audience with visual content that you have made particularly for their
platform. If that works, you will slowly shift your focus to that new
platform, and adjust your content processes to fit that one best.
Over time, the number and complexity of your processes will likely
grow. At the beginning of your business, you want to be flexible, but don't
mistake that for winging it. Write down what you do and why you do it, so
that you can eventually turn your evolving system into a collection of
Standard Operating Procedures. Having everything documented that way
will make your company a well-oiled machine, and that will make it more
sellable, even if you don't intend to sell.
YOUR INITIAL PRICING WILL NEVER BE RIGHT,
BUT TRY ANYWAY
When you’re just starting, finding the right pricing model for your
young business seems very hard and almost entirely arbitrary. That’s
because, at such an early stage of your business, it is impossible to find the
“correct” price for several reasons.
At the beginning of your business, revenue serves one purpose before
any other: validation. A paying customer is validating multiple things at the
same time. They are saying that your product is good enough to solve their
problem, they are saying that it provides more value than it costs, and they
are saying that their problem is painful enough to pay for a solution. With
that one payment, product, value, and problem are validated.
That’s why the price is only secondary. As long as it is not higher than
the value of the product, it will be sufficient to allow for business
validation. It may not be the perfect price, and you may leave money on the
table, but at that stage, it only matters to show that the business works.
Early pricing validates your business and initial product. Later pricing
optimizes overall revenue.
There are three rules to early pricing: it’s never perfect, it can be
changed, and it should be aspirational.
Particularly when you are building a complicated product, you will have
to start with a slimmed-down version of your final vision. It will only
contain the basic features, the functionality that is needed to show what
problem the product solves at its core. But your price should reflect the
value of your full vision. That is because you are selling to a particular kind
of customer: the early adopter.
The Psychology of Pricing for Early Adopters
Regular customers look at a product, calculate the immediate value they
would receive, compare that to the price, and purchase if the benefit
significantly outweighs the cost. If a product promises to be better in the
future, they dismiss this as a purchase risk. “Majority customers” buy in the
here and now; they are customers anchored in the present.
Early adopters or their even more radical peers, the innovators, don’t
think like that. They make purchasing decisions on what things could
become. They will buy an electric car even though the charging
infrastructure may not yet be there for it: they trust that the network effect
will take care of that if enough people get involved. These customers buy
for the future; they are anchored in the hope and trust that the things they
purchase will turn out to be great.
And that final state is what they see when they look at the first quirky
version of your product. They see it for what it could become, not for what
it lacks. And they will pay for what they believe it will be. Of course, there
is a lot of nuanced thinking going into such a purchasing decision, but you
can be sure that the innovators and early adopters in your market will pay a
premium for a product that breaks new ground.
Here’s the catch: you will have to live up to the expectations you set
with your price. And you’ll have to do that rather quickly. The early
customers may become your biggest supporters and marketing channels if
you do it right. If you fail to fulfill your promise, they will soon pack up
their things and move to another promising product.
It’s important to think of your price as a very fluid number with a lot of
flexibility. It is not set in stone. What matters is the value you provide to
your customers.
Value Metrics: How to Measure the Value You Provide
Your price should reflect what you think the value of using your product is
for your customers. This is tricky, as software products are continually
evolving, and the value they generate evolves with the product. A good
strategy to measure the value you provide to your customers is to determine
their central value metric and measuring that.
What is a value metric? It is the most relevant metric that goes up when
your customer’s business is doing well. For an image hosting service, it is
the number of images uploaded. For a music streaming business, it’s the
number of times their songs were streamed. For a team-building service, it’s
the number of team-building exercises successfully finished. If your
customers are barbers, it’s the number of beards they can shave in a day.
The point is: if that number goes up, they make more money. And if that
number goes up, you should make more money, too. If you use tiered
pricing, splitting the tiers among certain economically sensible limits of that
value metric will make a big difference in your revenue.
Price Acceptance: Purchasing Power and Jobs-to-Be-Done
Be aware that the acceptance of your price levels also depends on the
purchasing power of your audience. Selling to large enterprise companies
will allow you to charge much more than when you’re selling to online
teachers who are working two jobs.
What you need to find out is how much it costs them right now to solve
this problem. Do they have a solution already? If they do, what are they
paying for it? If they don’t, how much time does it take them to do it
themselves? How much would that be worth?
One approach that always helps with determining this number is the
jobs-to-be-done framework. It states that every product or service replaces
something else, but not necessarily the same kind of thing. Imagine a
software product that provides AI-generated technical drawings. It may not
just replace another software, but make a whole position in the company
superfluous: that of the technical draftsman. With one purchase, the
company could save $100,000 or more in a year. Now imagine a CRM
system that has specific features that automate the work that was usually
done by unpaid interns or a half-automated task that is run once a month.
How much does that save the company?
For FeedbackPanda, we knew that the purchasing power of our
customer base was reasonably low. They weren’t paying for any solution
yet, so they weren’t budgeting for a tool like ours. The resource that
teachers invested was their free time, which they valued surprisingly little.
So, we chose to price our product at a point that reflected what online
teachers would make by teaching just one more hour per month. That
turned out to be a very acceptable term for teachers, and it held true when
we increased our prices by 50% only one year into the business.
Find out the way the problem is solved now, and figure out what
resources are invested in it. That will heavily determine if your price is
acceptable or not.
The Problem of Underpricing
Significantly underpricing your product will create a few problems down
the road. While it will likely get you a lot of customers initially, many of
them will be very price-sensitive. In general, bottom-of-the-barrel
customers are hard to deal with, as they will want to squeeze the most value
out of your customer support and your product for the lowest price.
Once you raise prices later, even a little, those customers could be very
vocal about their disappointment. While there are ways to deal with that,
like time-limited subscription grandfathering, you’ll be limiting yourself
from the beginning, and you will surround yourself with customers you
don’t want.
Price always communicates value. By pricing a product surprisingly
low, you are saying that it is worth very little. That will scare away
customers who are looking for high-quality products. Those are the
customers you want because they are invested in making the product better
and allowing it to thrive.
The Problem of Overpricing
Overpricing your product, on the other hand, is not as bad. You’re
communicating that you think your product is worth it, you indicate that it
is a professional tool, something for experts, for the people who know what
they are doing.
Don’t underestimate the signaling value of price, particularly in
crowded markets. The moment you are substantially cheaper than other
products, customers who care about quality will think you’re worse. The
moment you’re more expensive, those customers may start paying attention
and check out your product.
With a high-price product, you only need a fraction of the number of
customers to become sustainable. And you can always lower your prices if
customers disagree with your value proposition. Don’t be afraid to charge
more, particularly in the beginning. You may think that your product isn’t
fully finished yet, but that is no reason not to charge the full value that
people are ready to pay. For your customers, the result of using your
product is what they pay for.
Another Thing to Try
If you don’t have any customers yet, be bold with your price. Zero
customers paying $20 might as well be zero customers paying $50. See if
you can find the early adopters that are looking for a quality product in the
future by showing them your sincere attempt to build one through a higher
price.
Find a good initial price for your product. If you offer subscriptions, be
sure to provide a yearly subscription option, at a slightly reduced price,
from the beginning. Those subscriptions are an excellent signal for how
much people think your product will be part of their lives. The moment
someone commits to a year, you know that you are solving a critical
problem well enough.
Don’t forget that, ultimately, initial pricing is all about validating your
business, product, vision, and what your market is willing to pay. Start with
a reasonable price that is not too high to be insulting, not too low to suggest
low quality, and shows your ambition to build a world-class product to
solve the critical problem of your audience.
DO YOU NEED A CO-FOUNDER?
Building a business alone can be daunting. You might lack a few skills; in
fact, I am sure you do. There is a lot to learn when you start a company, and
you will never stop running into unexpected challenges that require the
acquisition of new skills and knowledge.
So, should you find someone to make all of this easier?
A partner, an equal, a co-founder?
Some founders are lone wolves and thrive on overcoming the daily
challenges. Other founders want to work on the things they enjoy and leave
the other stuff to someone who is better suited to that work.
Some founders want to live a life of responsibility and share none of the
spoils, while others want to work in a more relaxed way and split the profit
with like-minded people.
Do you need a co-founder? Not necessarily. But your business will
benefit immensely from having a co-founder.
If you are a solo founder, you just do what’s right. With co-founders,
you have to justify your choices, or at least achieve alignment about them.
Choosing to build a company with another person can be a challenge. All of
a sudden, responsibility and accountability are part of every decision. For
some people, that is very easy, while others may have a hard time. It boils
down to one core component: communication.
Communicators First, Founders Second
If you are looking for a co-founder, look for someone who can
communicate well with you. No matter how different your skill levels are,
you can work together well if you know each other’s goals and methods.
That requires you to make sure that you’re aligned regularly. That can only
happen if you speak to each other face-to-face.
I had a co-founder once who would only talk to me when they felt that I
was lagging behind on my work. Before that, they were incommunicado:
they didn’t reach out, didn’t ask if I needed their input, they seemed not to
understand the subtleties of technical work, and they never tried to learn
them. As a result, my own frequency of communication decreased, as I got
more and more annoyed with their apparent detachment. The business went
nowhere.
Communication is a trust-building activity. When you don’t understand
something in the business, you will need to make sure you talk to your co-
founder and find a common understanding. You don’t need to be an expert
in everything they do. However, you should have a solid grasp of the why
and the how of their contributions to your business.
Personality Alignment (and Why It Shouldn’t Involve Beer)
There is the saying in the startup community that you should find someone
to have a beer with, but this rarely ever translates into an excellent
entrepreneurial relationship. Sure, it’s great to work with a friend, but there
is no connection between socializing and working together successfully.
Particularly with entrepreneurial people, social drinking can mean
completely different things: a mostly introverted thinker may avoid these
events, while an extroverted networker thrives on those situations. If
“having a drink” means “having a meaningful discussion about your
potential impact on the problems of the world,” that’s another story. But
don’t look for someone with whom you can have a beer. You don’t want to
miss out on a great co-founder because they prefer a glass of wine.
Find someone with whom you can solve a problem. Both of you should
get excited at the prospect of tackling a complicated and annoying issue.
This tendency is the core indicator of the entrepreneur: we can’t look at a
problem without wanting to solve it immediately. If your co-founder does
not express any kind of interest in solving real problems but is more
interested in “playing startup” or toying around with technology, be very
careful. Their drive to get through the painful parts of your entrepreneurial
journey might fizzle out very quickly.
Find someone who is equally excited when they talk about their work
and who will glowingly speak about your business when they’re asked what
they are doing. Even the most introverted character can capture the
attention of a crowd with their enthusiastic portrayal of how you are
impacting the lives of hundreds of customers. You want a co-founder that
will do this at least as well as you do. If they lack the passion for your
business when they speak to others, how much passion can they have for it
when they talk to themselves?
Empowerment Alignment
When you start talking to potential co-founders, find out how much they
care about empowering people. That’s a good indicator for several
important things: their willingness to help your customers, their focus on
building a problem-solving product, and their perspective on building and
enabling a great team inside the business.
Empowering people is at the core of entrepreneurship. Co-founders
have to empower each other to do their best work. This is so much easier if
they have a burning desire to make the world a better place for everyone.
If your co-founder cares as much as you do, you are aligned along a
fundamental axis. They may be more into marketing or development than
you are, but their real goal is to build something that lifts everyone. And
that is what you want from a business that lasts.
Skill Alignment
When it comes to the skill set, you can go either way. It doesn’t matter if
you are polar opposites, clones of each other, or anything in between.
Complementary skills are excellent and allow for separation of concern.
Now you can work in parallel, with every founder focusing on their
strengths. But in the end, you will both need to do work that lies outside
your comfort zone. Make sure to lay out the responsibilities for that kind of
work from the beginning, so there are no “I thought that is your job”
discussions when it comes to working on things you both don’t enjoy.
If there is plenty of skill overlap, that can help your business too. Two
sales-focused founders can sell twice as much. If both founders like to code,
the codebase will be built maintainable and team-compatible from the
beginning. The challenge of this constellation is not to step on each other’s
toes. You will need to be precise in the responsibilities of each founder and
how to resolve conflicts, both in work and in the direction of the business.
Follow the approach laid out in Michael E. Gerber’s E-Myth Revisited and
create an organizational chart for what you think your business will look
like in five years, then add one founder to every position on the chart. That
will allow you to pre-determine who has the final say about what.
As long as the lines between the founders are clear, then having
excellent communication will allow you to create a company where people
respect and listen to each other.
The Perils of Being a Solo Founder
If you want to go at it alone, that is okay, too. Just be aware that there is no
one to help you when you’re sleeping or sick. As a solo founder, you are the
company. Unless you can outsource or delegate work to employees, you are
responsible for all things. It could mean a few years of all-day-every-day
dedication to your business before you can hire people to help you out with
these things.
If you have read the 4-Hour Workweek, you may have the goal of
building an automated business that won’t take much of your time. That
may be the result of your entrepreneurial journey, but the beginning phases
will need much more time and attention. Be prepared to spend significant
time on your business when you go at it alone.
You will need to build systems to deal with the high amounts of work
much faster than with a co-founder. After all, a co-founder can take over
things when you’re traveling. They can help out when you’re indisposed.
Without a co-founder, you won’t have that luxury. Automating and
documenting your internal processes becomes a front-of-mind action that is
highly important to staying sane as a solo founder. It will also make it much
easier to hand over the reins of the company at some later stage of the
business.
Things to Look Out for When Vetting a Co-Founder
There are a few things to look out for when considering working with
another founder. You will both be interested in growing the business and
deriving monetary value from it. This can get problematic if you’re
misaligned on a few axes.
Contribution Asymmetry
If you found a company with someone who has an excellent network for
you to sell into, you run into the risk of doing all the work yourself, because
they may feel they bring enough to the table by already having the network.
Assuming that shares are distributed equally, both founders should work
equally hard on the business. This could get quite complicated if your co-
founder came into the company as a source of capital. How much work do a
few thousand dollars genuinely represent? Be very clear in your
communication what is expected of each founder.
Wealth Asymmetry
If there is a noticeable difference in wealth levels between your co-founder
and you, your decision-making may be impacted very differently by your
drive to generate profits. If you’re living on a shoe-string budget yourself,
you may want your business to be ramen-profitable as quickly as possible.
A co-founder with a sizeable financial safety net may look at more long-
term profitability. Neither perspective is necessarily wrong, as both lead to
positive business results. Be very clear about the near-term expectations
when starting the business. Find something that works for all founders.
Unequal Share Distribution
Often when founders look for co-founders, they already have been thinking
about their business for a long time. They may even have built a prototype
or have paying customers. At that point, it is quite unlikely that they will
opt for a 50/50 share distribution with a new co-founder, as they took a
substantial risk in getting the business this far. At that point, no founder is
willing to part with half the company easily.
Usually, the co-founder gets a minority of the shares that is large
enough to warrant them still being considered founders. I have seen
everything from 49.9% down to 5%. Be aware that your co-founder’s
interest in building the company into a profitable business may not be the
same when they only own 5% of the shares. Imagine selling the business
for $1million: they would only get $50k while you would get the remaining
$950k. These results are worlds apart, and while you may be financially
secure for the rest of your life, your co-founder can maybe afford to scrape
a few years off their 30-year mortgage. These are entirely different
incentives. Be sure that both of you are fine with the distribution of your
shares.
Vesting Expectations
At the beginning of a founder relationship, things are usually looking great.
You get started working on the business. Things begin to happen, and
progress is made. You’re confident in your co-founder, and they are
working with a lot of passion and drive. But who is to say this will last for
more than a few weeks? You can’t know, and because of that, you should
look into a vesting schedule for their shares. In VC-funded startups, vesting
schedules are usually multi-year, as the momentum required to become a
unicorn startup with $1 billion or more in valuation takes a few years to
aggregate into speeds that allow for explosive growth. For a bootstrapped
business, this timeline could be a bit of a stretch: you don’t have a runway,
your business is a risky endeavor. I recommend a vesting schedule that
starts after six months and then vests a part of the shares every quarter. This
allows for dealing with contingencies and changes in the business
landscape.
Outlook Asymmetry
If you are a bootstrapper, you will be looking for a co-founder that wants to
go down the bootstrapped route, too. But what if they change their mind?
What if they push for outside investment, derailing your efforts to build a
sustainable business that has no investors telling you what to do? This
needs to be very clear between the founders. Some entrepreneurs see
bootstrapping as the initial phase of a business, and some see it as the
optimal state for the lifetime of a company. Make sure you’re aligned here
before you enter into any agreements.
The same goes for eventually selling the business. While most people
entertain the idea of the big exit, some founders don’t care about it. This can
lead to unpleasant surprises when you get that call or email with a life-
changing offer, and your co-founder shrugs it off. Make sure you work
toward the same business goals.
Finding a co-founder that shares your passion and sees eye-to-eye with
you on the future of the business can be the most incredible thing. Carefully
vet your candidates and make sure that you can communicate well. Check
for alignment on how vital empowerment is to the both of you.
And, have a beer with them if you must.
THE SURVIVAL STAGE
THE SURVIVAL STAGE AND YOU
Releasing a product for the first time is like jumping into a lake: the water
might be too cold, and you don't know what to expect. But once you've
jumped, you'll get used to the temperature quickly, and you'll be having a
great time swimming around.
Usually, founders launch their product way too late. They tinker around
for months and months, trying to get things perfectly right. Some never start
because they always find something else to build, just in case. Several
things need to be healthy to build a business that thrives and survives.
A business can only be as healthy as its founder. If you're struggling
with stress and anxiety, things will start slipping through the cracks, further
increasing the chaos. But you can prepare. You'll learn about the mental
traps and uncomfortable conversations you will encounter and how to
prepare for them.
The Survival Stage is the time to turn your prototype into a quality
product by building the right things and building things right. We'll look
into improving your product slowly and deliberately without adding more
complexity than absolutely needed. If you work on keeping the product
slim and focused, you'll have a much easier time maintaining and extending
your product later.
The moment you have customers, they will start talking to you. You'll
learn how to help your users most efficiently without getting distracted
from working on your product and business. We will also take a look at the
kinds of pricing strategies that could work for your business, which ones
could be dangerous, and how to find more customers for your services.
In this stage, everything will be a rapid product iteration. Your goal will
be to build resilient systems to deal with the complexity of operating a
business while looking for reliable and repeatable processes to guarantee a
profitable engine of sustainable growth. You will work on helping
customers first to find the product and then to find their way through it.
MENTAL HEALTH: IT’S NOT
OPTIONAL
WHY YOUR MENTAL HEALTH MATTERS
Running a company is hard. Running a bootstrapped company is
particularly hard. Unlike a company with funding, every decision you make
has an impact on the immediate survival of your business. That can take a
toll if you’re not prepared.
You will need to take care of your mental health, at all times. I've made
the mistake of ignoring the signs of stress, anxiety, and burnout. It took a lot
of effort to dig myself out of that hole. It left a few scars, and I still feel jolts
of anxiety when I hear certain notification sounds long after selling my
business.
Learning about how to deal with perfectionism, impostor syndrome, and
similar psychological hurdles will make you resilient to self-sabotage. In
the end, the only person that truly stands in the way of your success is
yourself. You will learn how you can give yourself permission to not be
perfect, to do things a bit beyond your expertise, and to go against the grain
where others don't.
Understanding that your work as an entrepreneur may also lead to social
headaches will allow you to prepare for uncomfortable situations and
conversations, and to focus on what matters most: building a life-changing
bootstrapped business. People around you may not understand what you're
trying to do, and there are ways to prepare for those encounters.
When you keep your mind healthy, your business can thrive. Don't fall
for the hustle-or-die mentality. You can be a normal human being and run a
business. You don't need to be the flawless superhuman that people often
project to be. I definitely never felt superhuman when I ran FeedbackPanda
with Danielle. Together, we managed to not ruin the business. But we had
our down days, our doubts, and our mistakes. That was to be expected, and
it was on those occasions that we learned the most, about running a
company and about ourselves.
You will be fine. Trust in your abilities and give yourself the mental
tools to weather the storms of running a business.
REAL AND IMAGINARY RESPONSIBILITIES OF A
BOOTSTRAPPED FOUNDER
As a founder, you will encounter many expectations. Founders have to
have a mission. They have to care about their customers genuinely. A great
founder is a leader, a visionary, an expert.
Sometimes you just want to be you—the entrepreneur who had a good
idea for a business and then worked on it diligently. You don’t need to be a
hero. You just want to run your business.
And still, you feel like you’re not meeting expectations. You feel like
you could do more to help your customers. Give more back to your
community. Others know so much more about your industry. Everyone else
is doing things differently.
Welcome to the world of imaginary responsibilities.
Every founder feels them. They creep into your mind when you see yet
another business that is doing better than yours while browsing Twitter.
They invade your dreams because you listened to that podcast with the
super-successful guest just before bed. They had so much fun laughing and
talking about their successes, and you’re sitting there, thinking you’re just
an impostor.
There are a few main themes that come up once in a while. Learn to
recognize them, learn to focus on what is real, and ignore the imaginary.
Perfectionism
You have been building this cool new feature. It works on your
development system, and it will be impressive once you release it. But the
user interface can still use some work.
You know that a few of your more technically illiterate users have had
trouble with complicated interfaces, and you want to make sure that every
single one of your customers gets some value out of the system. So, you
spend another week polishing the UI.
Then, you notice that the documentation you wrote for the feature could
use a few more clarifying videos. So, you spend another week creating
walkthrough videos for every single way customers may use the product.
Then, you notice something else. And another thing. You end up never
releasing the feature.
Welcome to perfectionism. It will keep you from achieving your goals.
“I have to build the perfect business.”
The perfect business doesn’t exist. Any business is a dynamic enterprise, a
thing that you do, not a thing you have. Nothing in your business will ever
be perfect, as there is always room for improvement.
Rephrase this into “I want to build a sustainable business. I want to live
a good life, and provide a solution that will help people.” Set your goals to
something you can control, not some platonic ideal of a business. A
working product does not have to be perfect. It just has to work well enough
to be useful.
Don’t stress. Approach your business with the Pareto principle, the rule
of 80/20: the last 20% of your work will take up 80% of the time. Save
yourself from wasting your time like that. Get 80% of it done, and deal with
the rest if (and only if) it is needed.
Focus on long-term goals and create traction, both within your own life
and with your market. Every action you take needs to have a real impact on
whom you want to serve. Don’t focus on details that only a few customers
may ever see. Work on things that lift all of your customers at the same
time.
Usually, the most impactful things are also the hardest things to do.
Start with those things. Don’t take the low-hanging fruit. It is usually the
first thing your competitors will also pick. Go for the things they fear to
tackle. Do this often. That is how you will stay ahead even if things don’t
seem perfect.
“I have to create the ultimate solution for all the problems my
customers have.”
If there were all-encompassing solutions, we would only drive one car. We
would eat one kind of cheese and use one type of shampoo. But we don’t.
We have choices because we have different priorities, and excellent
products take that into account.
Rephrase this into “I want to provide value to my customers that makes
their lives easier.” They don’t expect you to solve all of their problems. A
Swiss Army knife is great, but you don’t see mechanics use it to repair cars,
or chefs to filet a fish. Special tasks need special tools, and that is true for
almost everything people do, in both their personal and their professional
lives.
Do one thing really well. Focus on the critical problem that your
customers have. They may have additional issues, but you should focus on
the most critical one. Once that is solved, you can look into other problems.
Not before.
The more you’re spread out with your products, the less you will impact
the lives of your customers. You will need to make choices about which
product deserves your attention, starving all the others. Particularly in the
beginning, focus on one specific problem and solve that problem alone.
Your attention to detail will be a differentiator to all those Swiss Army
knives that look great but are ultimately disappointing.
Impostor Syndrome
You’ve been thinking a lot about your bootstrapped business. You did the
research, built a prototype, talked to prospective customers, and worked
their feedback into your MVP.
Then, one day, you read an article about your target industry, and you
stop reading in the middle of the page. You know you did all this research,
but you feel like you don’t have any idea what is going on in the industry.
There is so much more you need to learn before you can start your business.
You definitely need to read more books. There are so many podcasts
you still need to listen to. You end up learning forever and never start your
business.
Welcome to impostor syndrome. It will keep you from achieving your
goals.
“I feel like I’m not good enough to create something great.”
In a time of life-long learning, we’ll never be finished learning. So, we may
as well start creating things sooner rather than later. Just like learning never
ends, neither does perfecting the product. When you start, it may not be
great. But it is something. And that alone sets you apart.
Rephrase this into “I can start with something that works.” The fact that
you are working on a solution to someone’s problem already sets you apart
from everyone else. Most people don’t even start. They are caught up in the
belief that if they learn just one more thing, they will be ready. They never
are.
Any improvement over the status quo is good. Don’t let the VC siren
calls of “it needs to be an order of magnitude better” lull you into thinking
that if you don’t disrupt the whole industry, you won’t be adding value.
Value-add starts with the smallest things. If you add enough value enough
times, you will make a significant impact on the lives of your customers.
Start with what you know. Create something that you think is useful.
Then go out and talk to the customers. Get their feedback and adjust.
Repeat until you have found the solution. Repeat this until you have made
something great.
“I have to be the most knowledgeable expert in the domain.”
Sometimes, you look at your audience and feel intimidated. Here are people
who have worked in their positions for decades. They know the ins and outs
of their business, and they have seen many vendors come and go. You feel
this fear that if you are not just as much an expert as they are, they won’t
even look at you.
Rephrase this into “I need to know enough to help.” Expertise takes
time, and it takes experience. You can’t read up on experience. You will
have to get it yourself by working for your customers.
You will become an expert by trying. If you succeed, that is great. You
have a fantastic business, and your life will be improved significantly. If
your business fails, you will now be an expert in the field. You know the
size of the market. You have developed a sense of where the problems are,
what solutions you can create, and how to talk to people in the industry.
You can start a new company or consult people who do. It is a win-win
situation.
Expertise comes from experience. Do the work. Spend the time. There
is no better place to learn than right in the thick of things. Jump into the
deep end and keep swimming. You will learn so much in such a short
amount of time.
Most importantly: you are not a fraud. Real impostors don’t suffer from
impostor syndrome.
Cargo-Culting
You read that bootstrapped founders do things a certain way. They never
take funding, so you swear you will never take funding. They talk to
customers at all times, so you take every opportunity to speak to your
customers at all times. This is what bootstrappers do. They iterate quickly
on their product, so you try and release a new feature every few days. They
go to conferences, so you fly all across the world to talk to your peers. You
notice that everyone seems to be crushing it. You redouble your efforts, and
you spend more time on your business. This is what bootstrappers do. You
have not seen daylight for a few weeks, your children only see you hunched
over your laptop, and you haven’t called your parents in over three months.
You keep doing this until you burn out.
Welcome to cargo-culting. It will keep you from achieving your goals.
“I have to do everything by myself because I’m a solopreneur, and
that is what they do.”
The term solopreneur is aspirational for many people who want to start a
business—keeping all the profits! Never having to explain yourself! Full
control over every aspect of the company! And then reality hits, you run
into brick walls, your energy levels are depleted, and you don’t enjoy work
anymore. That’s not what you want.
Reframe this as “I can get people to join my cause when I am
overwhelmed.” Humans love to join things that have a purpose. People
want to be part of missions, and they want to help. Don’t think you have to
do everything alone. You won’t, and you can’t. At some point, you will
need other people.
Delegating work to others can free you up in many ways. It’s not just
about your time. It is about your focus and your potential. Any task you
don’t want to do is a task that keeps you from taking care of something that
you want to accomplish. Interruptions will slow you down and deter you
from reaching your goals.
We waited much too long with hiring people at FeedbackPanda. I was
taking care of development and customer service. Incoming help requests
constantly interrupted my product work. I still get PTSD-like symptoms
from the Intercom notification sound that indicated a new customer service
conversation. The moment we hired a customer support person, and they
took that workload off me, my head was clear again within days. I could
focus again. And it turns out that other people are better at customer service
than I am. They would keep calm and help where I frantically apologized
and overwhelmed customers with technical details. Delegating will make
the experience better for you and your customers.
“I have to risk burnout because successful people work hard.”
Hustle porn is everywhere. People show off their accomplishments on
social media and in the founder communities. Businesses hit their goals and
milestones left, right, and center. Everyone is crushing it, and rarely do you
hear of anyone struggling. But you struggle all the time. Is there something
wrong with you? No one else seems to have these issues.
Reframe this as “I have to take care of my mental health.” A business
will struggle if its founder struggles. There will be ups, and there will be
downs. People don’t usually talk about the bad parts. Only recently have I
seen founders share their tales of struggle and defeat in public spaces. It is a
great start, but the stories of glory and success still prevail.
Burnout is not a badge of honor. It is a medical condition. It’s a state
you don’t ever want to experience. When you are burned out, you lose your
drive. You are exhausted; you lose the joy of your work, and your
performance suffers. It takes a long time to get out of that state.
I had experienced burnout twice before, once when I was working for a
VC-funded company in Silicon Valley and then later when growing
FeedbackPanda. In both cases, it took me a long time to recover. Finding
the motivation to work is hard when the sound of an email triggers a mild
panic attack. That is not a good place for a founder.
Working hard does not mean working long hours. You can be
productive by working smarter. Delegate tasks that irritate you to people
who love doing them. Automate away things that don’t need your direct
involvement. Then move to other repetitive tasks. Repeat until your
workload is manageable.
Here is the thing about responsibilities: they are all in your mind. Sure,
you may have contracts and obligations, but what you focus your attention
on is determined by your thoughts. The expectations you set are all in your
head. Once you become aware that the only thing standing in the way of
your success is yourself, it becomes so much easier.
Don’t fall for being perfect. Don’t doubt yourself. Don’t do things
because that is the way things are or have been done.
Just be your authentic self, ready, and eager to learn. That is an excellent
foundation for a sustainable business that helps real people with their real
problems.
PRODUCT EVOLUTION:
CONTROLLED GROWTH AND SAYING
NO
BUILDING A PRODUCT UNDER CONSTRAINTS
Once you have started selling a product, you'll want to make sure it
gets better and better at serving your customers.
In theory, that means inventing new features and improving upon the
old. In reality, founders that don't focus much on controlling the growth of
their product turn it from a slim and focused offer into a bloated monster.
Saying "no" to feature requests becomes a necessary skill to learn. In
addition to making sure only the features that genuinely provide more value
to the customers make it into the product, you'll also need to make sure you
build them in a way that allows you to change or remove them when
needed. What is required today may be obsolete or harmful tomorrow.
Maintaining the product with that thought in mind requires doing certain
things a certain way.
Bootstrapping a business means saying "no" to the non-essential things.
Your resources are limited, so you have to prioritize the actions and choices
that have the most impact. For your product, that means being aware of all
your options, weighing their relative potential, and choosing the ones that
provide the most value.
Additionally, setting up your product and infrastructure with a healthy
measure of abstractions and flexibility will guarantee that you can make
those choices reliably over time. If you take care to establish these practices
from the start, evolving your product efficiently will be that much easier.
BUILDING THE RIGHT THINGS
THE EVOLUTION OF THE “WHAT”
When it comes to making things better, it's essential to understand where
to start. You want to figure out which items are more critical and which
requests may sound vital but are not.
The longer you're in business, the more your customers will ask for
features. It's just human nature: we want things to improve and are rarely
happy with the status quo. For someone with limited resources, this means
you will have to prioritize. You will learn about several prioritization
frameworks, what they're good at, and how you can use them for your
business.
Every product-related decision boils down to whether it adds value to
your business, your customers' lives, and your own. Managing a product
can be overwhelming, and what seems like a good idea at the time often
turns out to not work at all. You will learn how to quickly and easily
distinguish value-adding features from vanity projects. That way, you can
make sure you're building a business that provides as much value as
possible.
FIRST THINGS FIRST: FEATURE
PRIORITIZATION FRAMEWORKS
A business is an ever-evolving thing. As the founder of your business,
you will adjust your processes as needed along the way, and you will
improve your product over time.
Often, inspiration strikes at the most random times: when you read an
article on an industry blog, or you listen to a podcast with someone who fits
your customer profile. Other times, your users contact you and tell you that
they need an integration for another service, or that they had to change their
workflow due to a new law that came into effect.
At any given time during the course of your business, you will have a
long list of things you could build: new functionality, improvements, bug
fixes, optimizations. In short, you have a collection of features that don't yet
exist.
Often, that list contains work for weeks or even months. But your day
only has 24 hours. And if you want to get anywhere, you need to start
working on something today.
There are several proven frameworks to help you prioritize which
features to build for maximizing your outcomes. These are systems that
businesses have developed to deal with features in a structured and
methodical way. All these approaches attempt to remove uncertainty and
quantify desirability in a way that works for every business.
Why Is Prioritization So Hard?
When you are both the technician and the manager of your business, you
will look at problems from two opposing viewpoints. The engineer in you
loves a challenging problem—even more so, when it's something you care
about. The entrepreneur in you only wants to work on things that add value
to the business and the lives of your customers. Engineers don't like boring
solutions, and entrepreneurs don't like technical gadgets. That one cool
interface component you always wanted to build? It's probably not the most
impactful thing you can do for your business right now.
Entrepreneurs are notoriously bad at quantifying effort; we're mostly
guessing when it comes to estimates. Cognitive biases make it even harder:
our willingness to build something makes it feel more achievable, while
features we don't want to work on feel like they require more effort.
Another thing we often discount is how easily we get excited.
Entrepreneurs are life-long learners, and we're curious about things that are
new and challenging. Projects that we have pondered for a long time start
losing their appeal when something new and shiny enters our vision. That's
why prioritization systems can help us overcome our prejudices and biases.
Feature Prioritization: Scoring
Many companies use some sort of scoring to prioritize their feature
development. For that, a feature is looked at from several perspectives, and
given a number. A final score is then aggregated to balance out all the
component factors.
Intercom uses the RICE method, which scores Reach, Impact,
Confidence against Effort.
Reach is measured directly from product metrics, expressed as a
number of people or events over time. "Customers per quarter" or
"transactions per month" are the units for this score. It expresses
how many users this feature will affect.
Impact quantifies how much a given feature enables you to reach a
business goal. How much does the feature move the needle? As
this is not easily expressed as a continuous number, use normalized
figures to represent anything from "massive impact (3)" to
"medium (1)" down to "minimal impact (0.25)."
Confidence is a percentage that expresses how confident you are
in your estimates about this feature. Do you know exactly what
awaits you? 100%. Is it a wild guess? 20%. The more you know
about the complexity and expectations related to this feature, the
higher the score.
Effort is the time needed for a feature, measured in "person-
months," the time a single person needs to work on the project to
complete it.
To compute the final RICE score, multiply Reach, Impact, and
Confidence, then divide by Effort.
Here’s an example table using the RICE score:
Project C is the clear victor among all those projects that have an effort
of two man-months.
The uncertainty of this model is that Impact and Reach are hard-to-
come-by data points. There is a lot of guesswork involved still, and that is
common to feature prioritization frameworks: in the end, they are making
guesses about the future. They may be educated guesses, but they remain
guesses.
Baremetrics uses the DIE method, scoring Demand and Impact against
Effort in a publicly available spreadsheet.
Demand: On a scale of "High (1)" to "Low (3)," how much pull
does the market exhibit? How many customers need this feature?
Impact: On a scale of "High (1)" to "Low (3)," how much will this
feature move the needle?
Effort: On a scale of "XS (1)" through S, M, L, XL to "XXL (6),"
how much work will this take?
The DIE score is then calculated by adding all the numerical values
together. The lower the score, the better.
Here’s an example table using the DIE score:
Feature B beats the other features and should be prioritized.
In almost all systems, scoring usually boils down to comparing the
potential gains versus the possible effort in creating the feature, weighted
for risk. This is an excellent choice for bootstrapped businesses, as
including development effort is a real requirement for a company that
doesn’t have funds for extensive R&D exploration.
Feature Prioritization: The Kano Model
This model attempts to set Customer Delight against Product Function,
comparing customer value generation with the investment needed to
improve the feature over time. If a feature gets better and better, the more
you invest in it, it is a great choice. If it doesn't make your customer much
happier but requires a lot of maintenance, it's not a priority.
The Kano model distinguishes between basic features that your product
just needs to be useful, called threshold features, and "excitement features,"
which are the most desirable outcome. When you invest time into these
features, they yield a disproportionate increase in the delight of your
customers. Once you have them, your customer's joy of using your product
skyrockets ever higher the more work you put into them.
Between the threshold and the excitement features are the performance
features. Those increase customer satisfaction proportionally with the time
and effort you invest in them. They're useful and provide value, but they
can never accomplish the same level of impact that excitement features
will.
Two kinds of features are discouraged by this model: indifferent and
dissatisfaction features. Anything that customers don't care about or that
will upset them should be avoided.
The Kano model gives you a wonderful progression. In essence, you
can find the most critical minimum-threshold features that you need to
supply, the performance features you can start working on early, and the
excitement features that will turn your customers into raving fans.
Feature Prioritization: Story Mapping
Coming from the agile development world, Story Mapping is a way to
quickly figure out the order of the steps you need to get a fully working
customer workflow implemented from start to finish.
You map out the workflow step by step using a Kanban board or
Kanban cards, arranging them in order from the start of the customer
experience to the stage that yields the final result.
Then, order the steps by importance, with the most important on the top,
with decreasing importance the further down you get.
Finally, create horizontal slices, grouping these steps into releases. Now
you have a prioritized list of groups of items, where you can apply further
prioritization until you're happy with the order of things.
Prioritizing Prioritization
There are many other systems to prioritize features: Affinity Grouping,
Opportunity Scoring, "Buy a Feature," "Value vs. Complexity Scoring," and
many more. Just make sure to stick to one system once you have found it to
be usable for your business. Switching around these methods will lead you
to prioritization confusion, which will impact your capability to make
sound, consistent product evolution choices.
In the end, try to limit the effort you put into prioritizing features. If you
spend days working out what you should be working on instead of building
features, you won't be able to do any real-world validation. It's tempting to
play with the numbers to see which kinds of priority lists you can come up
with, but the goal of this process is not to get a perfectly legitimated
checklist. Feature prioritization is a guesstimate at best, fed by intuition,
preliminary assumptions, and a few metrics. Treat it as a potentially fallible
activity.
Spend a few hours on this task, consistently revisit your choices every
few weeks as a form of Continuous Validation, and spend most of your time
actually working on your product. Incrementally improving a flawed
product is better than not having a product at all.
BUILD FOR VALUE, NOT FOR APPLAUSE:
PRODUCT MANAGEMENT UNDER HEAVY
CONSTRAINTS
A bootstrapped founder will have very little time to devote to building
things that don't matter. Everything you do in your bootstrapped business
should have a meaningful impact on moving your company toward a state
of stability and growth. Bells and whistles are the least of your concerns
when you're trying to get to profitability.
To accomplish this, focus on maximizing the value that your product is
capable of producing. Three major approaches should go into any product
decision:
It should maximize qualitative impact: "How well does it solve the
customer's problem?"
It should maximize quantitative impact: "How many customers are
being helped?"
It should provide a minimum of usability: "How easy is it for the
customer to get their work done?"
As bootstrappers, we have no time to deal with things that don't provide
value to our customers and hence our business. It is possible to accomplish
all of these three things when you decide how to build features for your
product.
Maximal Qualitative Impact
Focus on the "Hot Paths." This is a software engineering term for the parts
of your software that are running much more often than others. For a photo
upload platform, that would be the part of the software that resizes photos
into thumbnails. At the same time, for a social media website, it's likely the
algorithm that determines what is shown in your user's social streams. What
unites all these software components is that if you speed them up even
slightly, it has a significant impact on the whole product.
You can also extend this concept beyond software. What are the hot
paths in the workflow of your customers? Which things do they need to do
over and over that your product doesn't help with yet? Is there anything you
can speed up significantly that would impact the day-to-day activities?
At FeedbackPanda, we found a simple thing that was such a hot path in
the workflow of our customers. Many teachers were putting a little sign-off
text at the end of the student feedback they created to let the parents of their
students know about their availability in the near future. As this changed
from day to day, it didn't fit into their feedback templates, as those were
meant to contain information about the curriculum, not the teacher. When
we noticed that teachers were copying and pasting this little bit of text into
their finished feedback, we quickly added a centralized "signature" feature,
where they could add their sign-off to their generated feedback
automatically, saving them a few seconds every time they used our product.
Over a day, that's a few minutes, and it quickly adds up. By adding lots of
features like this, we shaved off a few hours a week just by optimizing the
hot path.
Within your application, hot paths can be found by looking at
performance metrics. If a screen that your users view 100 times a day loads
a second faster, that's a few minutes saved at the end of the day. If you
measure which parts of your service your customers use most often, you
will know where your optimization efforts will be most impactful.
You can accomplish this on the user-experience level by using tools like
Hotjar and CrazyEgg, which are called behavior analytics tools, and are
mostly recording your users' sessions. They offer heat maps and full session
recordings, which are very helpful but also raise many privacy questions. If
you integrate these services into your product, consider making them an
opt-in choice for your customers. People usually don't like being watched.
A less intrusive way is collecting anonymized metrics from your
frontend code by counting how often a particular page or component is
instantiated or used. The details will be unique to every product, but the
idea is the same: find out what people use most often and make it better.
Services like Amplitude, Heap, or Pendo will help
Consequentially, you will avoid wasting time by ignoring the cold
paths. If your users rarely use a non-critical feature, it makes no sense to
optimize it, even if that is easier than speeding up another part of the
product. Just make sure that the features that are rarely used (but very
important) are working well enough, like reliably submitting a report before
a deadline after weeks of working in it.
Maximal Quantitative Impact
Whenever you invest time and money into a new feature or an
improvement, make sure it impacts as many customers as possible at the
same time. It should provide the highest potential value to the largest
number of people. Don't focus on something that only 10% of your
customers can use. You will be able to add these things at a later point when
you're swimming in resources. Notably, in the beginning, any change you
make to your product and business has to be a meaningful improvement
over the status quo.
Over time, you will likely add a few things that help a few people a lot.
But to gain critical mass, you need to start with something that helps a lot of
people at least a bit. The idea here is to turn your earliest customers into
evangelists for your product, who will shout it from the rooftops. If you
only build things that amaze a few of them, that'll be fewer people to do
your marketing for you.
There will be the odd exception of a feature that is created for a small
but vocal segment of your customers. Be careful not to do this too often, or
your product will move too far off the path of being useful to all your
customers, it will only be useful to the loud ones.
Measuring quantitative impact works the same way you would measure
hot paths since those measurements of a qualitative use are at least partially
quantitative as well. For each feature, count and plot how many of your
users actually use that feature over reasonable periods. Rank by most-used
feature, and look into potential improvements there. For new features,
making sure that they will resonate with all of your customers can be
checked by adding a mock button for the view/component you don't have
yet and present the curious users who click it with a popup promising to
implement it. Measure how often people click on that button, and when a
threshold is reached, you can consider building it.
Minimum Usability with Maximum Simplicity
When you build features, it's not likely that you will release a fully featured
and highly polished version on your first deployment. I would even
consider this a waste of time as it would take far too long and would lack
any meaningful validation. For that reason, you should release features as
soon as they provide the basic functionality they are supposed to perform.
That does not mean your product should be ugly and look scrappy. A
usable and clean interface is a valuable feature in itself. However, it isn’t
necessary to go overboard with the optics. Remember that your solution has
to be better than what your customers have used before using your product.
It does not have to be the best possible version of itself just yet.
That said, you can make sure you have a baseline of usability by using a
UI framework from the beginning. Frameworks like Bootstrap, TailwindUI,
or Material Design will allow you to build all of your components, views,
and pages using a coordinated and cohesive design approach. With
predefined layouts and interface elements, you can be sure to have a good
foundation from which to build your features.
Whenever you can, reduce clutter and complexity. If configuration
options can be removed from a view and put into a configuration dialog,
move them over. If something isn't used most of the time, having it linger in
the interface could be more of a distraction than it is helpful. Interfaces
should be as simple as possible.
In many cases, this will go against the express wishes of your
customers. In my experience, users will always go to "just add a button for
X" as a suggested solution to their immediate problems. Well, your users
are not designers or product managers. All that this suggestion should do
for you is to trigger some research into the underlying problem and how
you can best solve it without adding complexity to your interface.
In the Survival Stage of your business, focus your efforts on creating the
features that make your service noticeably better for the majority of your
users without making the product harder to use. If a feature accomplishes
this, go ahead and build it. If it doesn't, stash it for now and build something
else that does.
BUILDING THINGS RIGHT
THE EVOLUTION OF THE “HOW”
When it comes to making things better, there are a few concepts that will
save you a lot of headaches down the road. My grandmother used to say, "If
you buy cheap, you'll buy twice." The same is true for software products. If
you build your service the scrappy way, you run the risk of having to repair
and extend it later, costing you valuable time that could be spent on more
productive work.
Building your product with abstractions in mind will allow you to
change it more easily and more securely later. Wrapping your external
dependencies into abstractions will make switching providers a less risky
endeavor. While you likely won't need to make a sweeping change like that
too often, it's likely that if you need to make it, it will have to happen
quickly. Proper abstractions will prevent you from spending weeks
adjusting your product.
At a particular scale, a successful business will need to adopt new
systems or processes, so having a flexible product that can easily integrate
those will be much easier to manage. The way you deploy your product is
one of the most important things to keep flexible, as you never know where
your entrepreneurial journey may take you: chances are you'll move your
system to another hosting provider after growing to a certain size. Being
prepared for that early will save you a lot of hassle.
ABSTRACTIONS
Here is a general rule for integrating a third-party-service: never integrate
the service directly. A service should always be integrated through an
abstraction. While every programming language and accompanying
framework works differently, they all provide certain kinds of implementing
abstractions, be it through modules, interfaces, macro systems, or packages.
For example, let's say you are integrating MailChimp into your backend
server. Instead of using the MailChimp URLs directly in your code, build a
class or module responsible for interacting with email list services that
handle all the specific calls internally. That way, your email list module can
later easily integrate a different service like Email Octopus, raw AWS SNS,
or ConvertKit, if you ever feel the need to change.
You would think that some services will never need to be changed. But
even in the SaaS world, there are seismic shifts. Companies go out of
business, they restructure their pricing to become prohibitively expensive,
or they pivot toward solving different problems. Abstracting integrations
will prepare you for all of these eventualities.
Abstractions Make Software Easier to Maintain
In addition to being able to change out parts and services when needed, a
well-abstracted codebase is very easy to maintain. When all functionality is
encapsulated in modules, you effectively have separation of concerns. All
payment-related code lives in the payment module or its submodules.
Anything related to authentication lives in a different module. Should there
be a need for communication between them, there can be either a service
bus or a common interface that clearly takes a request from one module and
returns the result from the other.
Consequently, you will know exactly where to go when you need to fix
a bug or add a new feature. This will help onboard new developers and will
speed up your own engineering practice, particularly when you're trying to
quickly fix an issue that popped up in production.
Also, abstractions shouldn't only be used for external dependencies.
Even internal concerns can be effectively separated. A great consequence of
this is that all of a sudden, your code becomes much clearer. It allows you
to produce better documentation as well, which helps get new developers
working on the code faster, and will be a big asset when you sell the
business.
Abstractions Are Easier to Test
Since logic is encapsulated in modules, you can increase your product's
resilience and toughness by writing tests that can reliably check if your
software produces the correct outputs for your inputs. A well-tested
software foundation results in a product that is less prone to errors and
outages, and will increase the value of your business because it will be
easier for a potential acquirer to take it over.
Once you can reliably test that the internal logic of your abstraction
works, you can extend your automated checks to integration tests as well,
by mocking the external services or using them directly. This provides you
with great opportunities to make sure your abstractions handle the unhappy
paths: what will they do when the services are down? How do they handle
changes in the data that gets returned? There are whole libraries and
packages that can do this kind of testing for you, so plug them into your
deployment pipeline as soon as you can.
How to Properly Abstract a Third-Party Service
The basic rule of abstraction is this: never call anything that an external
service provides directly. Don't connect to a service API using a hard-coded
URL. Don't send an HTTP request to your authentication dependency
directly from the logic that handles the login routine.
Always have a layer of indirection between where a service is used and
where it's called. Let's imagine you're using Mailchimp and want to add a
new email address to your customer email list. Let's also imagine
Mailchimp provides an easy-to-integrate SDK or library to connect to their
servers, containing a function called addToList that will send the email
address to their servers to be added to a specific list. In the backend code
that is responsible for this, a function called handleAddEmailToList
gets 
called. 
In 
this 
function, 
don't 
call
Mailchimp.addToList(email, listName) directly. Instead,
create a module that encapsulates all email-list-related logic called
EmailListModule, 
and 
implement 
a 
method 
called
addEmailToList(email, list), which itself integrates the
Mailchimp.addToList call. That way, no matter which email list
provider 
you 
end 
up 
using, 
calling
EmailListModule.addEmailToList will always work.
The Kinds of Services that Should Be Abstracted Away
Make sure you are particularly aware of abstracting away these service
categories:
Payment providers like Stripe, Chargebee, Paypal: Treat
customer transactions like long-term business relationships that
may need to be transferred from one payment provider to another
eventually. Don't lock yourself into one provider forever: keep
everything you need to migrate your customer to another service in
your own database and build your abstraction around the
assumption that you could one day need to switch this out for
another solution.
Authentication providers like Auth0, but also your OAuth2
implementations: Authentication preferences and best practices
change over the years. Before 2019, no one had heard of "Log in
with Apple," but Apple made this authentication method
mandatory for applications that offered social logins soon after.
You will need to extend or completely swap out your
authentication logic eventually, so treat your user accounts in the
same way you treat your customers' payment history: always keep
at least one method to reach out to your customers even if all
external services are malfunctioning. For this, I recommend
capturing their email, even if they log in using OAuth2-based login
systems like Log in with Google or Log in with Facebook.
Notifications and chat like Intercom, UserList: Your marketing
and customer communication needs will change over time, but you
will always need to be able to reach your customers.
Email, including transactional, marketing, and customer
communication systems like SendGrid, Mailchimp, and
Intercom: Like its real-time counterpart, asynchronous
communication needs to be available to your service, no matter
which provider you use.
Database connections like MySQL or PostgreSQL: While these
are notoriously hard to change at any point, at a minimum you
should abstract away the initialization and configuration steps into
their own modules. If you need to migrate your database to another
provider at any point, recompiling your code because you can't
dynamically change the connection strings is a hassle.
Logging: For your own sanity, use a simple abstraction around
your error logging tools. You will have different requirements for
your developer compared to your production system, and having
things hidden away behind an abstraction reduces the chance of a
computation-heavy logger call making it into the production
system.
Metrics collection: Like marketing tools, metrics collection
services are notoriously expensive. You might have started out
with a cheap tier of such a service only to learn a few months later
that, for your current needs, this service has become prohibitively
expensive. If your metrics collection logic is extensive, replacing
the service could take you a few weeks. If you have abstracted the
collection and sending logic, it's a matter of minutes.
These services are the most likely ones to change throughout the
lifetime of your business. None of those systems should be replaced lightly,
but when there is an emergency, you need to be able to swap them out
quickly. If you wrap all of them in an abstraction from day one, you'll be
prepared for whatever may come.
FLEXIBLE ARCHITECTURE
Particularly when you’re building a bootstrapped business, you won’t
start with a server infrastructure of 20 large servers in a data center
somewhere. You will want to start small and cheap, scaling only when
necessary.
Containerizing Your Service
I suggest setting up your hosting infrastructure in a cloud-native way: make
it compatible with a large number of cloud hosts from the beginning by
encapsulating your backend systems in Docker containers. That way, you
can run them locally, on your VPC host, on small cloud providers or the big
ones, like AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud.
Developing software using containers may seem a bit inflexible due to
the added steps. Still, it allows you to conceptualize your software in the
same kind of environment that it will run in when you deploy it to your
production system. Building software like this will surface dependency and
configuration errors much quicker and safer. After all, you will see the
errors as they happen on your local computer, and not just after having
deployed a new faulty version to production. It's a way to keep your
operational peace of mind. You will still need to do ample testing before
every deploy.
Having your systems in immutable containers will force them to be
mostly stateless, which allows you to save your data in a single source of
truth, likely a database or in-memory storage system. Stateless containers
will enable you to launch as many as you need to handle the increasing load
over time since they can work on different tasks in parallel. Many
orchestration systems can auto-scale containers to match the computational
demand of your customers.
Once you have multiple containers doing work in parallel, you may
want to look into having the containers communicate with each other to
distribute tasks and use shared resources evenly. Two technologies stand out
here: Cache Data Stores and Message Queues.
Cache Data Stores like Redis or Memcached are semi-permanent and
lightning-fast in-memory data structure stores. If you need to access certain
kinds of data quickly and often but also need to keep it up-to-date, using a
Redis instance that all of your containers access is recommended. Any
change in that datastore will immediately be picked up by each container,
eliminating the need to synchronize data between the instances. This is
useful for things like rate limiting connections for each user, for example.
By keeping the current quota and usage statistics in the cache data store,
you reduce the load on the database and allow each container to make
accurate choices as to whether it should serve a request or not.
Message Queues like RabbitMQ or Apache Kafka allow your system to
distribute work between its components. Imagine your application runs in a
container, and to keep everything snappy, you want to let a long-running
task be executed by another container that runs on a server that is tuned for
more performance. A message queue would allow you to hand over the data
and wait for the result of the computation or get progress reports. Message
Queues are useful to decouple the request from the actual work.
Using containers also allows you to test and quickly deploy new
versions of your product without much hassle. In a Google Kubernetes
Engine setup, updating the running version of your product is a single
change to a configuration file. Reverting to the previous version is just as
easy.
When I set up the infrastructure for FeedbackPanda on the Google
Cloud, I liked that part the most. With a simple edit to a config file and a
shell command, the Kubernetes cluster would fetch the new container from
the container repository, start it, and reroute traffic to the new instance. If
there were any errors in the container, it would revert to the previously
running system. This kind of rolling restart went unnoticed by our
customers, and the automated reverts averted many downtimes. The
deployment process became effortless. Development, as a result, turned out
to be a straightforward and flexible activity.
This flexibility extends to selling the business as well. An easy-to-run
system is an easy-to-sell system—the less specific knowledge your acquirer
needs to run your product successfully, the better. If all they need to know is
which version number to increase and which command to run to deploy a
new version of the software, their perceived deployment complexity is very
low. Eventually, your acquirer may want to adjust the process or change it,
but for any transitional work, a fully automated system is the best-case
scenario.
Making Tough Choices: The Architecture Trilemma and Other
Issues
Every structural decision is a tradeoff between two out of three things: high
flexibility, high performance, and low complexity. A highly performant and
simple system will be very inflexible, and a low-complexity system with a
lot of flexibility won't perform very well. In this context, choose the two
that will give you the most control as a bootstrapper. In most cases, that will
be high flexibility and low complexity. Particularly early on in your
business, you will change a few things, sometimes very core parts of your
product. To be able to do this, it's okay to give up some performance. Your
early customers won't mind—they'd rather have a moderately fast product
that fits their needs than a lightning-fast product that doesn't.
You will often need to decide between offering a compelling feature and
adding complexity when you consider building new features. Make sure
you pick features that create additional value for your business the more
you work on them. Using a prioritization framework that takes this into
account will help with that.
This doesn't mean you need to adopt long and tedious processes that
keep you from freely exploring all possible solutions to a problem. Don't
embrace copycat "agile" processes like bloated SCRUM systems just
because you've used those in previous jobs or have heard that this is the
latest in software engineering. Find the systems that work for you, and keep
them as simple as you can.
There's a chance you're a perfectionist. As a software architect, this will
make sure you never get anywhere. I had to learn that "good enough" is
what things need to be to enable me to run a business. Whenever I was
brooding over an architectural choice between multiple options for too long,
I evoked a circuit breaker. I made a list of the pro's and con's, listed as many
as I could for each decision, and then chose the one with the most favorable
ratio. I may not have made the right choice all the time, but at least I made a
choice. Analysis paralysis is real, and very dangerous if your most precious
resource is your time.
Finally, think about validating your architectural assumption every now
and then. This won't be a weekly task, but every year, you should look
through all of the services you use, the structures you have built, and the
processes you have established within them. If they still help you reach
your goal to create and sustain a business that can operate without you, then
you can focus on the operational parts of your service.
To enable your architecture to support a "built-to-sell" business, keep an
eye on complexity. When the time comes to sell your business, you'll want
to have an understandable and straightforward bundle of architectural
components to hand over to your acquirer. The simpler, the better.
CUSTOMERS: BUILDING
RELATIONSHIPS THAT LAST
WHY RELATIONSHIPS MATTER: MAXIMUM
CUSTOMER SERVICE WITH MINIMUM EFFORT
Once you have paying customers, you will notice one thing: it’s easier to
keep a customer than it is to find a new one.
Before the subscription economy, a transaction was over when the
customer left your store. All you needed to do was to get them to buy as
much of your inventory as possible. After that, you would likely not see
them again, and if they returned in the future, it would take a few times for
you to recognize them as a regular customer.
Transactions in the SaaS world are different. For a successful interaction
with a customer, maintaining a relationship is critical, as it is an ongoing
transaction between your customer and your business. SaaS businesses
thrive in the membership economy, where ongoing relationships result in
reliable and recurring transactions with long-term customers, over and over
again.
In the Survival Stage, your primary goal is to help your customers as
much as you can without spending all day doing it. You also want to learn
how to retain them as long-term patrons of your business, how to keep them
happy, and when to move away from customers that are not right for your
business.
When you are running a bootstrapped business, you have to do
everything. Build the product, deal with financials, and market your
solution.
And customer service is paramount. People are reaching out with
questions. Sometimes they are frustrated because they have a deadline.
Sometimes they want to chat. In any case, it will eat up your time if you
don’t find a way of working well with your customers.
Luckily, there are tools and methods for this, even at scale. At
FeedbackPanda, I was solely responsible for the technical support of more
than 5,000 customers. And, I still had time to develop software.
The Expectations Are Real(-Time)
Emails and tickets are a thing of the past. It used to be the reality for
customers of most businesses to send a plea for help and maybe, within a
day or two, someone would tell them that they were working on it. A few
days or weeks later, someone would resolve their issue or tell them that this
was not considered a problem.
Customer service is different today. Solving problems has become a
real-time activity as customers expect to receive immediate solutions. They
expect there to be a conversation whenever they want to initiate one. Even
in enterprise B2B SaaS, where email reigns supreme, people expect
immediacy.
As Metha, Steinman, and Murphy say in Customer Success: “Customers
expect you to make them wildly successful.” Every single one of them.
That can easily be an insurmountable resource problem for a
bootstrapped founder. You don’t have time to talk to your customers all day,
every day.
The good news is that there is a crucial distinction. Customers may
expect help immediately. But that does not mean they want to talk to a
human. They want to have their problem solved. If they can solve their
problem themselves and learn how to do it in the future, they will be
happier than if someone does the job while they have to wait.
Customers also don’t like to be told that they didn’t understand the
product. Allow them to learn from a variety of materials. Some people like
to read, and some want to watch videos.
All of these methods allow for automation and self-serve solutions.
Only in rare cases do you need to engage the customer in an actual
conversation. If they fail to solve their problem from the self-serve solution,
you can still go back to the old “we’ll get back to you as soon as we can” or
turn the conversation into a real-time, operator-based chat.
At FeedbackPanda, we used Intercom for our customer service. They
allow for all three primary modes of customer service: synchronous,
asynchronous, and self-help. Tools like Intercom have great integrations
into many parts of the tech stack, and you can leverage that to be both
responsive to incoming questions, and proactive when you need to reach
out to the customer before they even know that there’s a problem. You can
integrate these tools into the frontend and backend of your SaaS
applications, and there are also options for native and hybrid apps on
mobile devices and tablets. All these communication paths end up in the
Intercom platform, so you can help people wherever they are.
Synchronous Customer Support
Real-time communication with customers is a beautiful thing. Being able to
help them right when they need help allows the customer service agent to
be empathetic to the pain the customer feels and give them a sense of
importance: “A real person is here to help you.” For people who are not
confident in their ability to solve their problems, this is an enormous relief.
We use the Intercom chat widget in all of our products where our
customers can log in. It is integrated into our landing page, the main
application, and our mobile applications, too. We initialize the widget with
information about the customer, so we can immediately see to whom we are
talking. When you have some unique identifier, you can also use the
Intercom addon system to create deep links directly into your admin
interface or link up their Stripe accounts directly into the Intercom platform.
That makes it very easy for the person helping the customer to get to the
places from which they can help quickly.
This kind of chat makes the customer service experience personal, both
for the customer and the agent. If you are in the early stages of your
business, you, as a founder, will be the person dealing with customer
support. This channel gives you direct and unfiltered access to your
customers and their issues.
You can extract incredible amounts of data from just a single
conversation by asking your struggling customers about their goals and
motivations. Then, you can use it to fix the issues they are having. At
Feedback Panda, we did this multiple times. There is no greater joy than
seeing customers’ reactions to a new feature or fix that was released within
an hour of them having a problem. People don’t expect to have any impact
on the tools they use, and when you surprise them, you can be sure they will
tell their peers about it.
Asynchronous Customer Support
The great thing about having a real-time chat widget is that it can also serve
as a delayed messaging system. You can reach out to your customers just as
much as they can start a conversation with you. Used correctly, this can be
an incredibly useful source of building trust and helping the customer. Used
excessively, it turns into spam and a source of annoyance. People are
usually okay with marketing emails, but having a message pop up while
they are working inside your application will always be a disruption. It
should be rare and meaningful to their lives every single time.
At FeedbackPanda, we integrated Intercom into our backend system,
and used their Messaging API to send transactional messages to our
customers. Only urgent messages would be in-app notifications; the rest of
them would be sent via email. Critical messages such as account
terminations were sent as both in-app and email messages.
If your customer does not react to an in-app notification, you can always
send them an email later. Some customers may take a vacation from their
job or be too busy to check your application, so for things that threaten their
ability to use their accounts, I recommend always reaching out using both
methods.
We also used Intercom for our marketing and onboarding emails. Doing
this plays well with having all our customers on their platform already. The
onboarding campaign, in particular, can be used to measure conversion
rates and engagement profiles. For newsletters and product announcements,
the email system will allow your customers to respond immediately, and it
will show up as a customer service conversation, with all your added
customer data present to help them out.
Self-Help Customer Support
One of the most time-saving tools we have ever used at FeedbackPanda was
the Intercom knowledge base feature. Most customers would reach out to us
with very similar questions. FeedbackPanda is a tool that does one job well,
so for most problems, there is an optimal way to solve them. After
communicating that solution to the customer, we would turn the customer
service conversation into a knowledge base article immediately. Whenever
a future customer would ask the same question or search for the keywords,
they would get presented with the article, from which they could then solve
their problem themselves. We did this for a few hundred questions
whenever customers would first ask about a topic. We ended up with
answers to almost all questions people would routinely ask. The number of
tickets that required human intervention plummeted and left us the
breathing room to run and grow the business.
Video and screenshots are always a good idea when creating knowledge
base content. Some people are great readers, but others are very visual or
need a narrative to understand a solution. We tried to provide both versions
in the same article, and it has been quite well-received.
Another Intercom feature we used to help customers help themselves
was AnswerBot. This machine-learning-based feature allows you to have
Intercom automatically respond with pre-written answers to specific
questions. We would use this for critical problems like “I forgot my login
credentials. How do I log in?” or “How can I update my credit card so I can
get back into my account?” AnswerBot would pick up these questions and
reply with a clear step-by-step solution, sometimes even a video. We also
linked deep into our product to the very screen they would need to visit.
Being able to help people immediately and automatically allowed us to
sleep soundly at night.
Things to Consider
With all these wonderful integrations, you will still have to be aware of a
few things. It’s not email. It’s not just between you and your customers.
With Intercom, there is another company in the mix, and your data rests on
their servers. That makes it a data-protection and privacy concern. Intercom
is compliant with regulations and likely has more security and privacy staff
than your business will ever have employees. This is more a question of
being aware of what kind of information is absolutely required for your
customer service agents to do their work efficiently. It’s perfectly fine to
give Intercom the unique customer ID so you can create links to your admin
interface. (You should never share social security numbers or any other
personally identifiable information you have on your customers.)
Price is always a concern for the bootstrapped entrepreneur. Depending
on how customer service SaaS tools scale their pricing, you can be perfectly
fine or in way over your head. It truly depends. Most subscription-based
SaaS businesses will be fine with Intercom as they scale pricing on how
many “Active Users” there are. If most of your users are paying customers,
that will be alright. If you offer a freemium plan, you will get in trouble if
you can’t offset the cost of your non-paying users. If you’re already
struggling with making money with a freemium product, this will hurt your
finances even more.
The proliferation of AdBlockers caught some customer service tools by
surprise. Depending on how spammy they were perceived, some chat
widgets made it onto the blacklists used by AdBlockers. Having your entire
customer service built on a system that some people may not be able to see
when using certain AdBlockers is a business risk. Customer service tools
will likely do their best to stay off those lists, but it could still lead to
availability problems from time to time.
As a consequence of the fact that your customer service data is hosted
on a third-party platform, which could be impacted by availability problems
at any time, it’s worth investing time and effort in setting up backups and a
migration path. Have the critical information about how you can reach your
customers (such as their email address) saved in your account database, as
well.
Make regular backups of the data that is held in your customer service
system and understand how to access it. There could be a day when you
need to migrate from one system to another. It may happen either for
business reasons or because of new regulations. Having a reliable backup
strategy and the means to move the customer service integrations to another
provider will help you to be compliant and avoid being locked in to any one
provider.
The Ultimate Goal of Customer Support
Finally, be aware of why you put all of these systems in place: you want to
help your customers reach their goals. Focus your energy and ingenuity on
building an enormous treasure trove of information for them to solve their
problems themselves, jump in when you’re needed, and make it a human,
relatable experience for your customers.
Excellent customer support is rare. When people encounter a great
experience with a customer support agent, they will talk about it. It’s a great
way to build your reputation as a brand that cares.
YOU MAY BE BARKING UP THE WRONG TREE:
RE-EVALUATING YOUR AUDIENCE
While most of your customers will likely enjoy your product, some won’t.
Some customers will be complaining a lot, asking for features that you
don’t intend to ever build, or are generally just very hard to please. When
you notice that something is wrong, you can usually trace it back to one or
more of your assumptions not being aligned with your audience.
This kind of misalignment can be grouped into three types, with
conflicts arising from members of your audience not being aligned with
which problem you solve, how you solve it, or how your product works.
Audience–Problem Misalignment
The most fundamental misalignment you can experience is when you're
solving a problem that your prospective customers don't have. It won't
matter if you built the world's most amazing product if it provides no value
to your customers. Only a solution to their critical problems can generate
that value.
When your prospective customers don't convert or even show interest in
your product, look for these potential product-related reasons:
Maybe you are not looking at the critical problem at all. Have you
adequately validated that the problem you're solving is critical? Could you
have asked different customers than the ones you're targeting as prospects
right now? Double down on your validation efforts. Ask more and different
prospects and figure out why what you assumed to be critical is not
perceived as such. Do you need to make your prospects aware that they
even have a problem?
At FeedbackPanda, we often had to show our prospects that writing
student feedback was actually a waste of time when done manually. They
just didn't know that it could work any other way. If you need to do
customer education before you can show your value proposition, adjust
your messaging and marketing efforts accordingly.
Maybe you are not looking at the critical problem anymore (or just
yet). Between your problem validation and now, has something changed? Is
your prospects' workflow different from the one you assumed they had
when you selected which problem to work on? If some of your customers
fit that pattern, be extra diligent in figuring out if this is where your
customer base is coming from—or where they are going. If their non-
critical is turning critical, great. Sit it out. But if it's a critical problem that is
turning non-critical, you need to act immediately and figure out which
problems you need to solve to retain your customers and keep helping them.
Maybe you are looking at a critical problem, but not theirs. Are you
sure you're talking to the right prospects? If you are absolutely sure you're
solving a critical problem, then there is someone somewhere who is willing
to pay for it. Find those other audiences by looking into adjacent markets.
Figure out what differentiates those good prospects from the ones that don't
care about the problem you're solving and market exclusively to the ones
where you stand a chance.
Audience–Solution Misalignment
Sometimes, you're working on the right problem, but solve it in a way that
doesn't resonate with your audience. This is often due to a lack of solution
validation, particularly how well you've understood the jobs-to-be-done of
your prospective customers, and what they need to get them done.
There 
are 
several 
solution-related 
reasons 
that 
could 
cause
misalignment with your audience:
Maybe your solution doesn't fit your prospects' workflow.
Sometimes, the institutional barriers in your prospects' jobs may be too high
for you to overcome. If the level of "we work like this here" is incompatible
with a new or different solution, your way of solving the problem just won't
fit. A lot of restaurants could benefit from a computerized order system. Yet
many prefer the time-honored technique of memorizing orders. It just
wouldn't fit to use a tablet and painstakingly enter every order where before
a mnemonically gifted waiter impressed diners.
Maybe your solution is incomplete. If you owned a fishing equipment
store that only sold fishing rods but no fishing lines, would you expect
customers to return once they figured out that they can't get everything they
need to start fishing? The same is true for your solution. If you help your
prospects with their problems insufficiently, then they will likely lose more
time using your product than they would by doing it the old way. Find out
what shape the input into your solutions will have and what your prospects
expect as outputs, and provide means for your solution to work with them.
If your customers have Excel files and expect the result of using your
solution to be a fully-featured one-file PDF with reports and calculations,
you shouldn't ask them to supply you with CSV files and product Word
documents. Envision a solution that works with the inputs and outputs that
your customers will realistically have.
Maybe your solution is too complicated. Often, this is related to the
inputs and outputs and the necessary pre- and post-work that goes into
making them compatible with the rest of the workflow your customers
have. Other times, your solution involves steps that your customers can't
envision taking, either because they don't have the knowledge or
permission. In your solution validation calls, make sure that your prospect
can take every action they need to use your solution effectively.
Audience–Product Misalignment
Finally, once the problem and solution are aligned, it may come down to the
product. Problem and solution are mostly abstract concepts. A product,
however, is a real-world implementation of the solution, and it is exposed to
the changing needs and preferences of your customers.
Take a look at your product to see if it may be misaligned in one of
these ways:
Maybe your product operates in the wrong medium. Are you
offering a web-based SaaS where your customers expect a native mobile
application? Are you sending emails when your customers would prefer
text messages or push notifications? Do your customers have to use your
complicated interface on small screens?
This extends to your help-desk as well. Are you offering real-time help
when your customers need a paper trail and prefer email? Are you offering
tutorial videos when your customers would prefer reading technical
documents?
Maybe your product or your messaging is too technical. If your
customers are much less technically inclined than you are, your elaborate
product could scare them away. Do your customers need an interface with
20 different buttons that allow for all eventualities? Or would a much
simpler interface with a few configuration dialogs be a better choice? Can
you expect your customers to have your level of technical affinity?
We ran into this issue with FeedbackPanda in the beginning. Some of
our customers were very new to online teaching, and they were scared to
make mistakes using their computers. It takes a lot of handholding and
support to help these kinds of customers to use your product efficiently.
And sometimes, it won't work; they'll give up or move to a more
straightforward product. At that point, you should stay in close contact with
them and see what they need, and if they find something that helps them.
Then, learn how you can enable your own product to do that.
Misalignment could be caused by something simple, like the wording of
your messaging. For example, do your customers understand the phrase
"heuristic-based statistical sentiment analysis," or would "find the tone of a
message" be clearer? You don't need to dumb it down, but you also
shouldn't overcomplicate it. As an engineer, I feel that I need to be as
precise as possible. Customers don't necessarily value this as much as you
think.
Maybe your product is confusing. Your customers don't want to be
confused. They don't want to be surprised by your product. And they
definitely don't want to learn anything new to be able to solve a problem
they already had to learn a product or even a manual solution for in the past.
Your product should be simpler, easier, and faster than anything they have
encountered in the past. If it's not, getting to understand your product is a
cognitive load that few are willing to take upon themselves.
That's not to say that people won't learn your product ever. It just means
that the simpler your product, the more prospects will play around with it to
a point where they can see themselves using it in the future.
How to Handle Audience Misalignment
Here's the worst-case scenario: your product may just not be for them. They
may not be your audience. You don't have to bend your product into a shape
that works for a market that doesn't value your vision. There will always be
people who wish for things to be different and will be vocal about that.
They need a different solution, but you are not the one that provides that,
which is fine.
Of course, if all of your customers exhibit this behavior, you should stop
and reflect if you are talking to the wrong audience altogether. Find the
customers that don't complain and see what makes them happy. Focus on
finding more of those customers and replace the customers that don't fit
your audience anymore.
On the other hand, if you have found that you're serving the right
audience but are just a bit misaligned on your perception of the problem,
solution, or product, you can fix it. Once again, reach out to your customers
to validate your assumptions, and dive deeply into the points of friction you
find in those conversations. Engage customers you have asked before as
well as new prospects that you haven't talked to in the past. Getting fresh
and new opinions into your validation calls is very important at this point,
as their absence may have led you to the impasse you're currently facing.
One of the great things about being a bootstrapper is how agile you can
be. You can react quickly to changes in the needs and wants of your
customers. If an assumption is wrong, you can quickly find a better
perspective to take—and you can improve your product and your business
immediately. There is no shame in being wrong about your assumptions.
They are mostly guesses, after all. Make sure you admit mistakes quickly
and focus on making your bootstrapped business better—one assumption at
a time.
CHURN, RETENTION, AND REVENUE: WHAT
MAKES CUSTOMERS STICK AROUND AND WHY
THAT’S IMPORTANT
Retaining a customer is easier than finding a new one. You already have an
open communication channel. They’re already interested in hearing from
you. You also know their behavior patterns, and you can infer how much
and how effectively they use your product from your metrics.
On average, a 5% increase in customer retention leads to a 25%–95%
increase in profits. So, keeping customers retained sounds like a great way
to keep your business on the right track. If it can impact revenue so
significantly, it is definitely worth your time to build a company that
focuses on customer retention.
How can you make sure the customer sticks around? What are the goals
that you should have to make sure that as few people as possible ever
cancel their subscriptions? You’ll learn how to focus on the preventable
churn and how to keep those customers around. You’ll see which kinds of
churn are dangerous and which can actually be beneficial to the bottom line
of your business.
Why Retention Has Such a Striking Effect on Revenue
The obvious goal is to continuously provide customers with a valuable
product throughout their entire journey. The moment your product does not
solve their problem anymore, they will find another solution. To prevent
them from leaving you for a competitor, you need to solve their problem for
them consistently and perpetually. Existing customers get used to the value
you deliver; in fact, they start expecting it. That makes them appreciate new
features and start complaining when the product doesn’t keep up with their
critical problem. For as long as you do that, you have a long-term
relationship, an ongoing sale.
After all, it’s so much easier to sell to a customer you already have. The
chance of selling to an existing customer is 60%–70%, whereas a new
prospect only buys 5%–20% of the time, according to Marketing Metrics.
That means you’re looking at three to eight times as high a chance to profit
from an existing customer. You’ll really want people to stay.
But sometimes, your customers will quit. This can happen for many
reasons, and only a few are in your control.
Generally, there is voluntary churn (e.g., when a customer terminates
the subscription) and involuntary churn (e.g., when a subscription is
terminated due to lack of funds).
Some kinds of churn are preventable. Sometimes, a customer leaving is
not the end of your relationship.
Reactivation: How to Talk to Churned Customers
To get a customer to return to your product, you can employ reactivation
strategies. After customers have quit, an automated email offering them a
free month or a discount is dispatched. That will allow you to reconnect
with undecided customers. Often, a conversation with those churned
customers will be very enlightening, as it will surface reasons for churn that
are still fresh in the minds of your customers. Mainly, in the beginning,
reaching out manually will be extremely fruitful to find and resolve the
issues that motivate customers to leave.
In some cases, you may get customers to return to the product by
reaching out. Don’t force it, though. You don’t want them to vent their
frustration to their peers about your forceful attempts at getting them back,
since their peers are very likely potential customers. Respect the choices
your customers make, and even though the paid part of the relationship is
over, they will continue to talk positively about your product. A business
relationship is never really terminated, and if you rely on word of mouth for
your marketing, you want all of your customers to feel valued and
respected.
Payment Churn: How to Recover Failed Charges
There is also payment-related churn. Credit cards expire every few years, so
unless you’re using a payment provider that automatically updates credit
card details through the Credit Network as Stripe does, for example, you
will eventually attempt to charge an expired card. When that happens, you
can either integrate a recovery solution like ProfitWell Retain or
Baremetrics Recover. These dunning solutions reach out to your customers,
prompting them to update their credit card information right after the failed
charge occurs. They are, however, not completely customizable. If you’re a
non-US company, you may run into blocked charges due to your
geographical location. Implementing a custom messaging system that tells
your customers how to get their bank to unblock the card will eliminate a
large percentage of this involuntary churn.
The Surprising Kinds: Empowerment Churn, Temporary Churn, and
Welcome Churn
Not all churn is created equal, either. Companies go out of business, or
pivot in different ways. A company canceling their subscription with you
could be tying up loose ends and stopping operating altogether. This
happens particularly often in the freelancing world, where people stop their
freelance work to take a full-time job or create a new business.
You may even be seeing a consequence of how much value you’ve been
providing. Your tool could have enabled someone so much that they are
now moving up-market, taking a wholly new and higher-paying job. If you
set out to help and lift your customers, this could be a bittersweet sign of
the real impact of your business.
Some churn is also just temporary. At FeedbackPanda, a large
percentage of our customers were new parents. Inevitably, they would go on
parental leave and would want to pause their subscriptions for as long as
they were not working. Offering a “pause and pick up where you left off”
solution was a clear path for us, and something similar could work if your
business is in a similar niche with expectable temporary periods of non-use.
Some churn is also welcome. Imagine you have customers who
continuously complain or request features you’re not willing to
accommodate as they don’t fit into your vision. As Seth Godin says, these
people are not the audience for your art. You should not force a relationship
with them just to get some money. Be happy to see them go, and invite the
people who like what you do to become your customers instead. They will
amplify your voice in their communities; they will rave about the product
that you built instead. Toxic customers should be encouraged to churn. Do it
nicely, in a friendly fashion. But make sure you don’t bend your product to
accommodate needs with which you are not aligned.
Customers with short-term needs also don’t hurt you when they churn.
In the membership economy, you’re looking to build long-term
relationships. You want a customer lifetime value that is significant, as you
invest a lot of time and money into acquiring the right customers. If a
customer leaves almost immediately after subscribing, and you’re sure
they’ve made this choice because they don’t need your product, don’t
worry. Their customer segment is not relevant to your long-term success,
and catering to those needs may lead the product away from being as
valuable as possible for your relevant customers.
Value Nurturing: Farm, Don’t Hunt
There is also something you can do to prevent churn before it happens:
value nurturing. It’s all about showing the customer the value they’ve
receiving from your product while they are using it. Show them how much
time using your product has saved them this week. Slack sends out an
aggregate statistics email every week, making it clear how much using their
tool impacts your teams. Find something that reminds your customers why
your product is great, and make sure you periodically visualize this to your
customers.
The book Farm, Don’t Hunt by Guy Nirpaz describes the concept of
value nurturing in great detail. If you want to work on showing your
customers how much value you provide, it will give you many great
insights and actionable ideas.
Value Nurturing: Engage and Educate
For example, regularly talking to your customers will help keep your
product on their minds. Sending out a newsletter every week with news
from the industry, a few tips on how to use the product more efficiently, and
sharing a couple of interesting articles will contribute a lot to customer
retention. Your brand will be elevated from a product provider to a trusted
source of information. When it comes to canceling a subscription, it’s much
easier to cancel something that is solely providing a tool when you need it
compared to a membership in a community that regularly keeps you
educated and informed.
Encouraging Annual Plans: Fostering Commitment
A great way to prevent churn is to make the billing cycles longer. If you can
churn 12 times per year, the chances are higher than if you only have one
payment. It’s also a highly psychological issue: annual plans are usually
discounted and therefore non-refundable. Purchasing such a plan will make
your customers want to get value from their subscription immediately and
as fast and for as long as possible. There is a sense of commitment to
spending a year’s worth of money on a single purchase. While you have to
provide the same value you would provide to monthly subscribers, your
annual subscribers will feel a stronger commitment to your product and
their choice to use it.
Note that a discounted plan or an incentivized early renewal option will
cut into your profits. Whenever possible, offset that with expansion
revenue, by selling upgrades or one-time products to your customers when
there is a chance. Or, price the yearly plan at sustainable levels and charge a
premium to your monthly subscribers.
Customer Feedback Tools and Public Roadmaps
There are a few things you can do immediately that will build customer
confidence and trust in the future of your business and your product.
Ask your customers methodically. Using a tool like Canny.io allows
your customers to suggest features and vote for the ones they find most
relevant. It will enable you to figure out which issues are common, and
generate a product roadmap from there. Sharing that roadmap will then
show your customers where the journey is going. For some, this will be
enough information to commit to a long-term relationship. Others will give
you valuable insights into their specific needs and requirements.
Intensify Your Onboarding: Find the Magical Moment
Potential long-term customers that churn quickly after adopting your
product are your most significant loss in terms of unrealized customer
lifetime value. Making sure as many new customers stick around during
their trial and after subscribing will significantly impact your bottom line.
Spend some time discovering which metric can be used to find out if a
customer will stick around or not, and then optimize your onboarding to get
your new customers to that point as quickly as you can.
For FeedbackPanda, that metric was writing and using their first
feedback template. Users who had created their own templates and
generated feedback with them were almost guaranteed to stick around and
convert into paying customers. So, we focused our efforts on getting the
user to that magical moment when the "a-ha" effect happened. We wanted
them to experience this as soon as possible. Once they did, they “got it.”
And we got them as our customers.
Thank Your Customers
Sometimes, a thank you note can make a difference. Particularly at the
beginning of your business, when you’re struggling for survival, take the
time to reach out to every single customer and say thank you. Thank them
for being part of your journey. Thank them for making it possible for you to
help them. Be grateful; send them a hand-written postcard if you can. This
is particularly powerful when you’re selling to a tight-knit community.
Seemingly random acts of kindness, particularly when they’re not aimed at
creating a viral sensation, will make a difference, and your customers will
feel valued and respected.
As you can see, most customer retention strategies are focused on
showing your customers that they are not just an account number with a
credit card attached. Give your customers the feeling that you value them as
people, as humans, and they will make sure they repay the favor. Make
them feel comfortable and appreciated, and they will stick around.
PRICING: SUBSCRIPTIONS, PLANS,
AND OTHER FINANCIAL CHALLENGES
PRICING IS NOT SET IN STONE: STRATEGIES
FOR DETERMINING PRODUCT VALUE
The great thing about revenue is that there are many levers that you can
move to improve it. The not-so-great thing about revenue in a bootstrapped
business is that it's hard not to move the wrong levers. Customers don't like
price changes, as they have budgets to care about and expectations of how
much a service is worth. If you irritate them with too many changes or too
much pressure to pay more, they will gladly find an alternative to your
product that gives them more peace of mind.
Adding more expensive plans could alienate your customers; increasing
your prices may upset those who have been with you for a long time. There
are many ways to deal with this, and we'll take a look at the ones that work
well and the ones that are likely to cause a lot of relationship damage.
Some strategies may work well at the beginning of your business, but
prove to be fatal further down the road. This boils down to the makeup of
your customer base. In the beginning, the early adopters will understand
that nothing is set in stone just yet. Once you sell to mainstream customers,
you can't run experiments that easily anymore.
In the Survival Stage, there is a high chance you'll settle with non-
optimal pricing plans because the ones you already have work well enough.
You can always change your prices. You own your business, and you can
change everything about it. Most payment providers allow you to have an
infinite number of plans, and you can add (and remove) as many as you like
at any given time.
There is no reason to stick with what you initially conceived, or think of
it as “good pricing.” Don’t hesitate to change the prices of your plans just
because you picked an arbitrary number of dollars when you first launched
the business. But, keep in mind that changes can be disruptive for your
customers, so there are a few things to keep in mind.
Honest Pricing and the Perception of Value
Always be transparent about changing prices. Inform every customer who
will be affected by this change. If you offer a trial period for your product,
make it clear when customers need to subscribe to get the prices they were
told when they started their trial. If you raise prices for existing customers,
inform them in advance, so they have a chance to commit or complain.
Having people frantically scramble to offboard their data because they can’t
afford your product anymore will create a lot of bad press and sour the
long-time relationships you so carefully built.
With enough value nurturing, customers will understand that a
continuously maintained and updated SaaS product warrants a price
increase. Some may not like it and protest, but in most cases, it will be a net
benefit for your business and your customers: you catch up to the value you
deliver, while they benefit from the additional resources this revenue
increase generates.
Budgets and Price Sensitivity
Keep in mind the budgets of your prospects. There likely is a ceiling, even
when you're selling to freelancers and other positions that determine their
own budgets. Find out which leadership is involved in this decision and
how flexible those budgets are.
Sometimes, what you sell doesn't fit existing budgetary categories, so
customers may not know if they have a budget at all, if there is a ceiling, or
if they could stretch existing budgets to accommodate paying for your
service. You won't know about this until you have talked to your
prospective customers in several exploratory conversations.
Price sensitivity is different depending on your customer types. Early
adopters buy the product that your service will provide once it's finished;
mainstream customers buy the product you sell right now. While you'll
want to provide a maximum of value for your price to either group, you can
get away with charging higher prices to the group that expects your product
to grow into something bigger than it is at the moment they buy it. Don't
abuse that trust.
Price Boundaries and the Fallacy of Pricing Too Low Too Early
Early bootstrapped pricing is often too low. Don't discount yourself. Just
because you're starting a new business doesn't mean you'll have to scrape
the bottom of the barrel. This leads to a big problem in the future. If you
believe that raising prices is hard but lowering them is easier, then choosing
a low price, in the beginning, will prevent you from ever meaningfully
increasing your revenue through price adjustments.
Pricing is strongly correlated with your positioning. If you position
yourself as a professional tool, you will be able to charge more, compared
to being perceived as a fun distraction. You may reach fewer people, but the
relationships you form with B2B customers are much stronger and more
reliable than if you were to sell to a B2C market, where you have more
customers with higher churn. If you position yourself alongside other high-
priced solutions, customers will accept paying more. If you compete with
low-priced products, your upper price boundaries will be perceived to be
comparatively low.
Pricing Is Always Conversational and Influenced by Expectations
In general, pricing in a vacuum is a questionable approach. In the
beginning, you likely don't have much customer data to anchor on. That's
fair, and it makes finding a working pricing model quite hard. Customer
conversations will help you understand what could work and what could
not.
Talking to your customers allows you to find out if they are genuinely
committed to buying your product. Pricing feedback from people who
wouldn't buy your product anyway is useless and dangerous to follow.
You'll need to focus on the prospective customers who will share their
expectations with you. You need to understand how they think about the
value of software solutions like yours and what they have experienced in
the past.
You should price the way people are used to. If they pay per seat for
other tools, you're likely to get more conversions offering that, too. If you
introduce an unusual pricing model like API-call-based prices in an
industry that usually pays a flat fee for services, you will have to spend
more time explaining to your prospects why this is better suited to their use
cases. Many leads won't materialize because once they see something novel
and complicated, they will go with what they already know.
The same goes for your price levels. Your customers will compare your
solution to the tools they already use and will evaluate you against the tool,
position, or team that your service is supposed to replace. While this is
mostly a positioning issue, your customers' prior experience plays into this
a lot as well. The more you know about that, the better your messaging can
be.
Moving Up-Market
Moving up-market is a common strategy for SaaS businesses: go after
bigger and bigger customers. Find the bigger budgets and get your cut.
While this is a great strategy when you have a mature company with a
stable revenue stream, it is not recommended while you are struggling to
survive. There are many risks to what seems like a lucrative path.
Enterprise customers are dangerous beasts: their purchasing processes
are opaque, take a long time, and involve levels of commitment you may
not be able to make.
Timelines are longer in the enterprise B2B world. The complexity of the
corporate sales process makes conversations take a long time and involves
more people than a self-service subscription service that generates revenue
at the click of a subscription button. You'll have to send emails, follow-ups,
explanations, maybe even take a few people in your prospect's company
through an extensive demo process. Only go up-market if you know you
can still run your business while you or someone in your company does this
much more intense sales job.
Subscription Tiers: Paid and Free
If you have a very clear-cut service offering, your product likely allows you
to serve the same kinds of customers with the exact same service. While
this is great for communicating the value of your product, you are probably
leaving money on the table.
At FeedbackPanda, we started our paid monthly subscription offering
by having a $5 plan and a $10 plan. The cheaper option had a few
limitations around the amounts of data that our customers could store in
their databases, while our more expensive plan had no restrictions. From
day one, most people chose to purchase an unlimited plan, even though they
wouldn't reach the numbers that exceeded the limits of the cheaper plan for
months. I attribute this behavior to the fact that we named the more
affordable plan "Basic" and the more expensive one "Professional." Our
customers were teachers who took great pride in being experts in their field.
Their own psychology made them gravitate toward the more expensive
option to retain that self-perception.
Tiers are not just tricks to make customers pay more for the same
service. They have to make sense. People understand advertising games,
and they will harbor very negative feelings toward you if they learn that
you're trying to trick them. If you offer tiers, make them comprehensive. Set
usage limits, lock away functionality, but always root those choices in
business-related reasons. Coercing customers to upgrade to a higher tier
without a justified need is not going to help you build a positive relationship
with them.
Don't make your pricing too complex to understand. A simple pricing
structure allows you to plan better and will lead to fewer surprises. Offering
three tiers is what seems to work well in most cases. Only very specific
kinds of tools get away with complicated pricing structures. Those tools
usually are highly technical and work at large scales, so that different use
cases warrant diverging ways of paying for the service.
A popular strategy is to offer a free tier with heavily enforced limits.
This allows your customers to make a habit out of using your service before
they have to commit to a purchase, which often helps convince prospects of
the value of the product. If you offer such a free tier, you will have to pay
extra attention to your prices: they need to make sense for those price-
sensitive customers, or else they'll migrate away after they start reaching the
limits at which you expected them to convert.
Looking at the Intention Behind the Price
At this early stage of your business, ask yourself this question: what is your
price supposed to do?
Are you trying to get established first? Are you trying to get your foot in
the door? Your very first customers are validation and multiplication
opportunities. You'll price differently for those customers than for later
customers. Deliver custom prices to the early ones, then reevaluate later.
Are you trying to maximize revenue? Look into the unit economics of
your existing customers and find ways to segment the customers that are
likely to be highly profitable and offer them more extensive plans with
more functionality and better guarantees.
At any point in your business, prices are in motion. Don't set them in
stone. Take it as a starting point; don't treat it like a fixed decision. Just like
you hope to improve your product, you should look at your prices regularly.
At FeedbackPanda, we increased our prices by 50% a year after going
to market. We softened the blow by simultaneously introducing a referral
system. We had great success in two ways: our monthly revenue grew as
customers agreed to pay more for their monthly plans, and we received a
large influx of cash from the customer who chose to lock in their prior
pricing by committing to a discounted yearly plan before the deadline.
While it was a scary moment, we were glad to have experimented and
increased our prices. Nothing shows that your customers value your product
more than when they choose to pay a higher price for it than before.
NOT ALL SUBSCRIBERS ARE EQUAL: DEALING
WITH PLANS THAT NO LONGER WORK
You may have started with subscription plans that turn out to be
problematic. At FeedbackPanda, we had started with a $5/month plan. After
a few months of offering that, we retired that plan because we noticed that it
attracted a kind of customer we did not want to serve: bargain shoppers.
The customers on that very cheap plan were using our customer support
channels significantly more than those who were on more expensive plans.
They complained more and requested more features than anyone else. So,
we closed off that plan for new users.
They hated it. Many people who had started their trial assuming that
they would get a $5/month plan reached out to us and complained that we
took it away before they got a chance to subscribe. While it always hurts to
receive such feedback, it was still the right course of action. The voices of
those who are bothered will always be much louder than the silence of those
who don't mind. We saw in our numbers that our conversion rate didn't
suffer from this change.
If you remove a plan, you have a choice: you either upgrade all users to
one of the remaining plans, or you "grandfather in" their subscription,
which means they get to keep their old plan even though it is no longer
offered to new customers.
Upgrading All Affected Customers
Your best chance to increase your MRR immediately is to upgrade all of the
customers on the plan that you intend to remove. This will also cause a lot
of trouble if you're not giving your customers enough time and options to
react to the announcement before an additional dollar changes hands.
Inform your customers far ahead of time. Give them a month or more if
you can. At the very least, there should be a few weeks should be between
the announcement and the actual change. Special focus should be on
communicating this change clearly to your trial customers who started their
accounts under the impression that this plan would still be available for
them. If you want to be particularly friendly, allow those customers to still
subscribe to the plan even while it's already unavailable for other users.
Some customers will cancel. A very effective course of action is to
reach out to those who intend to cancel and try to get them to stick around
with a discount offer. Often, giving them a month for free is enough of a
sign of good faith for them to reconsider their cancellation.
Should they still cancel, think twice if it's worth spending more time
and effort at winning them back. If at all, try to reactivate them via email a
few days or weeks after they quit. New prospective customers who start a
trial even though the lower price is gone are those you want to interact with
at this point. These and your existing customers who are willing to pay
more for a better product should be the focus of your attention.
Grandfathering All Affected Customers
Grandfathering can be great to keep your early customers around, but there
is a risk of underselling your product significantly. It can be a business risk
not to be able to claim the real value of your product as revenue just
because you think your customers are emotionally attached to a lower price.
Expansion revenue is made impossible if the customers who happen to be
subscribers already are receiving a life-long discount. An excellent way to
allow grandfathering is making it conditional and temporary: allow them to
keep the lower price for a year if they upgrade to a yearly subscription.
Else, force them to upgrade to the new price. Understand that they should
pay for the product they receive today, not the product they signed up for
years ago.
When we removed our cheapest plan, we decided to grandfather our
$5/month customers. One noticeable consequence was that most customers
who reached the limits of their plan eventually upgraded. Only a few
customers tried to stay under the limit by deleting data diligently. They
would rather save a few dollars a month than have access to their old
feedback data. As this number was relatively low, we ignored it and never
encouraged them to upgrade, as it wasn't worth our time.
We grandfathered our customers indefinitely, which is something I
would not recommend. Give your customers a high but finite amount of
time to enjoy their old subscription plan. After a year or so, request that
they upgrade to the correspondingly more expensive plan. Your product has
grown in terms of value, so all of your subscribers eventually should
compensate you accordingly.
NOT ALL SUBSCRIPTIONS ARE EQUAL:
OFFERING YEARLY PLANS FROM THE START
Most bootstrapped businesses offer monthly subscription plans. The
revenue that is reliably generated from your customers that way is
incredibly reliable. If you know how many customers you have, you know
exactly how much money will come in this month, next month, and the
future, provided you keep the same number of customers.
That's where risk comes into play. If you only offer monthly plans, a
wave of cancellations can cut into your revenue substantially, and you will
notice within the next 30 days. Yearly subscriptions allow you to lock in a
portion of your revenue in a much more reliable way, while providing
something valuable beyond dollars: validation.
Yearly Subscriptions and Validation
There is something incredibly satisfying that happens when a customer
chooses a yearly plan for your product. Not only do they pay up to 12 times
as much as a monthly subscriber, but they also communicate something
powerful to you. They trust your business to be around in a year, they trust
your product to provide value for at least another year, and they’re sure that
they won’t find anything better until then. That is why having a yearly
subscription option is not optional. It should be a choice from the
beginning.
It also gives you access to a very interesting subset of your early
customers: your future evangelists. Look at it like this: early adopters are
already betting on your product for the foreseeable future. If some of them
actually commit to paying you for a year, then you can be sure that they will
go above and beyond to make sure your business succeeds. They will be the
people who talk about your service on social media, introduce it to their
peers and the members of the communities they frequent. Leverage that,
particularly in the beginning.
Yearly Subscriptions and Cash Flow
Besides the validation component, a yearly plan will allow you to borrow
from future profits to invest in your business. Being able to invest the 11
months of advance payments into the growth of your business will liberate
you from the month-to-month thinking you would have if you only offered
monthly plans.
This will protect you from running out of money too fast. Any
meaningful churn will still do financial damage to your business, so unless
at least half of your subscribers are on a yearly plan, you will need to iterate
your business when people start canceling. Having a few yearly subscribers
will allow you to spend a few more days or weeks dealing with the things
you need to improve.
Yearly Subscriptions and Discounts
You should also discount your yearly subscriptions, for two reasons. First, a
cheaper subscription will incentivize customers who like to save on
purchases they would make anyway. Second, and this is a much more
critical reason, a discounted plan can come with a (clearly visible and
communicated) non-refundable clause. This allows you to use the full
amount for investing in your business, alleviating the need to hold funds for
possible refunds, should the business run into trouble.
Most customers will understand that discounted plans are not
refundable. Make absolutely sure that your refund policy is clearly visible
to your customers before they purchase, and have it easily visible in your
account settings as well as in your knowledge base and Terms &
Conditions.
At FeedbackPanda, we sometimes refunded yearly subscriptions even
though we had a no-refund policy. For a handful of hard cases like people
who had suddenly lost their jobs or had medical emergencies, we quickly
refunded the money. This saved us from chargeback fees that would have
occurred had our customers gone through their bank, and it created a lot of
goodwill with the people we helped. Many of them became very loyal,
loudly talking about our surprisingly helpful customer service and how
respected they felt when we made an exception to the terms. To our
knowledge, no one ever abused this system, and the loss in revenue was
worth all the feedback and gratitude we got from our customers.
SELLER BEWARE: PRICING MODELS THAT CAN
BREAK YOUR BUSINESS
There are a lot of great ideas when it comes to optimizing your pricing to
attract more customers or keep them retained. Two pricing models can be
hazardous if not implemented carefully: freemium accounts and lifetime
accounts.
The Risks of Freemium Accounts
A freemium pricing model can be great to get people to use your product,
start integrating it, and eventually start paying for it. It can be very
dangerous to your business if the freemium tier offered allows customers to
use the product extensively without ever needing to pay for it. Setting clear
limits that are easily reached when the product is used in a revenue-
generating way is paramount here.
Businesses like Baremetrics almost went out of business because
freemium users caused infrastructure costs to skyrocket by using the
product in unlimited and unmetered ways. When Baremetrics released their
freemium accounts, thousands of businesses signed up and imported their
payment provider data into the Baremetrics system. The onslaught of data
was so intense that they had to scramble to provision new servers to be able
to handle the load. At the same time, customer support queries grew
because those new users needed assistance, too. Without making an
additional dollar's worth of revenue, they now had to pay more for
infrastructure, and their paying customers had to wait longer to get support.
If you try to attract customers using the freemium model, make it hard
for them to earn money without paying you. At least that way, once a user
derives meaningful value from your service, they have to start paying. You
can accomplish that by turning key features into paid-only options or
instituting limits that are hard to reach for an amateur but easily reached by
a professional. Usually, this scales along with the value metric of a
customer, like the amounts of successful purchases in an eCommerce store
or the number of photos uploaded to an image upload site.
The risk of freemium increases ten-fold when you need paying
customers to offset the cost incurred by your freemium users. That's why I
recommend setting limits that keep your customers from making too much
money off the free tier of your service, and that keep your customers from
overwhelming your infrastructure.
Be advised that many third-party services charge according to the
number of active users. Unless your paying users can offset that cost, using
the freemium model can be very prohibitive to choosing the right
integrations for your service due to the very high number of non-paying
customers. Particularly if you implement freemium later during the course
of your business, this could cause a lot of financial stress. Whenever you
choose to use a customer-facing service, look at what will happen when
your user count changes by order of magnitude.
Finally, freemium plans could cannibalize your paid plans. Every free-
plan user is a user that could be on a paid plan if you didn't have a freemium
option. Think about it like this: if the customer would have paid, you don't
capture their revenue. If they wouldn't have paid anyway, why would you
want them as a customer?
The Risks of Lifetime Accounts
Lifetime accounts are quite similar, as the danger also lies in resource
consumption that, after some time, exceeds the money they paid for the
product. For a customer, "lifetime" means their own lives, while for most
businesses, the "lifetime" in question is that of the current iteration of the
product. This can be quite confusing, and it usually leads to bad blood once
the perceived forever-account gets migrated into a monthly plan. These
accounts are great to raise initial capital for a business, but they create a lot
of pain and become liabilities in the later stages of a business—particularly
when you intend to sell the business.
Lifetime accounts often signal that the business is in a bad financial
state. If you were confident that your subscribers would stay with you for
their "lifetime," why take so comparatively little money up front?
Lifetime accounts also attract less-than-desirable customers. The
expectations you set up by offering a paid service for life can become
insurmountable. With a recurring subscription fee, you can at least defend
that a customer has the right to claim your assistance again and again. But
what will happen when a customer who paid what in most cases is just a
few hundred dollars for lifetime access to a service reaches out to you every
few days, holding your attention for hours? These expectations will be hard
to fulfill.
With a lifetime account, be absolutely clear in your Terms & Conditions
what "lifetime" means. Is it the lifetime of your customer? Your lifetime?
The lifetime of the product in this version? All versions? Is it the lifetime of
the lifetime offer? The moment a customer understands "lifetime" to mean
something else than what you intend it to be, there will be a very
uncomfortable conversation in your future.
It's Not Just Risks
Both Freemium and Lifetime accounts can work for your business. When
applied consciously and with the right strategy, either can provide a benefit
to a bootstrapped business—when applied temporarily.
Slack uses the power of Freemium to get people to join free self-
organizing communities, only to later have the same people carry the paid
version into their day jobs. Zapier offers a "Free Forever" plan that
similarly converts free users into customers once they require more
advanced solutions to their integration problems. Both companies treat their
free users as valuable customers, because they know that conversion rates
are high, and a single user who works for an organization with 50,000
employees can turn into a lead catalyst.
Some businesses that desperately need cash up front can sell a few
lifetime accounts to their earliest customers, and that will give them the
funds they need to jumpstart a business that can survive long enough for
recurring revenue to establish recurring revenue. But lifetime accounts are
just that: a temporary cash injection that, after a while, may turn into a drain
on your resources.
Whatever you do, revisit your choice every few months. Keep your eyes
on the Customer Acquisition Cost and the Lifetime Value of your users and
how those metrics change when you implement these kinds of accounts.
Once those metrics show a tendency toward negative revenue, be prepared
to phase out those offers.
Generally, adding one more customer to your software service won't
cost you much. The marginal cost of SaaS businesses is near zero in many
cases. If this is true for your business, you can definitely experiment with
these pricing models. Just make sure you don't wipe out potential recurring
revenue streams indefinitely by giving customers subscription options that
give them a lot of value without compensating your business for providing
it.
Both freemium and lifetime accounts can attract the kinds of customers
that you may not want to serve. When in doubt, stick with monthly and
yearly subscriptions after an extensive trial phase. That way, you'll see if
customers are with your business because you continuously provide them
enough value. If you're not, they will cancel.
BUSINESS: PULLING LEVERS AND
ADJUSTING SCREWS
MAKE THE PRODUCT SELL ITSELF: REFERRAL
SYSTEMS
One year into running FeedbackPanda, we released a referral system.
It was an immediate success, and it stayed that way. When we sold the
business, around 40% of new signups came through our referral system.
Immediately after turning on the user-facing parts of the referral system,
we started seeing results. Our social media channels quickly filled up with
our customers crafting posts that contained their referral links. Signups
went up, and churn rates went down. Referral systems benefit everyone
involved, and you can set one up efficiently, too.
The FeedbackPanda Referral System
FeedbackPanda had been getting along fine with a steady influx of new
customers for over a year. Through the strong word-of-mouth marketing
that happened organically within the teacher tribe, our customers were used
to their peers talking about our service.
We decided to add a referral system when we raised our prices by 50%
only eight months after our public launch. The referral system was
supposed to both amplify existing word-of-mouth marketing and give our
customers a means to offset the increased price of their subscriptions. It
was, in essence, a retention play. That’s why we went with a double-sided
reward structure: both the referring and the referred customer would get a
substantial reward for participating.
It worked like this: for every three customers you referred, you would
get a free month of the service. It would be automatically credited to your
account the moment the third referred customer purchased a subscription.
All referred customers would get a 50% lifetime discount on their
subscription. After increasing our prices, this brought their monthly cost
right back to where it was before but made the price so much more
attractive compared to a non-referred subscription.
This massive discount had an interesting effect: prospects who had
heard of our product actively asked for referral codes on social media and
were often bombarded with large numbers of responses, each containing a
referral link.
As a consequence, we saw our referral links pop up in lots of places on
social media, and even in obscure subreddits and on niche blogs. It was a
big success, and signups became substantially referral-driven.
How Does a Referral System Work?
Referrals are not a cheap marketing trick. When done right, they can be a
great way to grow your business and provide value to new and old
customers alike.
The idea is simple: you get a customer to invite a new prospect to your
product, and you reward either just the referring customer or both for
participating in the transaction.
Most often, a unique referral link is generated for each of your
customers so you can track who invited whom. You then encourage your
customers to share this link wherever they think new prospects might find
it.
The reward of a referral system will vary significantly depending on the
kind of service you offer. Dropbox famously used a referral system that
gave both the advocate and the referred user increased storage space. At
FeedbackPanda, we discounted the subscriptions of both parties. There are
many more incentives you can use, such as store credit, coupons, cash, or
gift cards.
The math is simple, too: if the discounted advocate revenue plus the
discounted revenue from the referred customers is higher than the non-
discounted revenue for a user that doesn’t participate in the referral system,
your system works.
How Can a Referral System Provide Benefits?
Referral systems are economically sensible because the rewards you
provide are worth the increased revenue that is generated by customers who
invest their time and energy into marketing your product.
This is particularly true in highly tribal niches, which is why we could
offer a 50% discount and still significantly impact our MRR with the
FeedbackPanda referral system.
When you sell into an interconnected group of people, the built-in
virality will give a lot of visibility to community members who recommend
your product. By offering a referral system, you add a way for new
customers to make substantial savings on a recommendation by a trusted
peer. You can’t do much better when it comes to incentivizing a conversion.
It becomes a win-win-win situation. The advocate gets rewarded for
referring the new customers: both from the service and in the form of trust
inside their tribe. The referred customer receives a reward for trusting the
advocate. And your business gets a new customer that is inclined to trust
the service. This kind of trust projection strengthens business relationships.
In the end, this will positively affect your customer retention.
What Benefits Does a Referral System Provide to Advocates?
There are three kinds of benefits that stand out for the customers that refer
your service to their peers.
The most visible one is the reward, often some form of cost reduction or
improved access to the service. That is something the advocate may enjoy
immediately after referring a new customer. This immediacy is essential: it
allows customers to turn referring new customers into a planned and
scheduled activity.
Our customers at FeedbackPanda were online English teachers. As it
turned out, the Chinese online schools they were teaching for had
understood the value of a referral system, too. The schools would pay
teachers handsomely for referring their friends and family to become
teachers on those platforms as well. By making clear at which stage of their
teaching journey a referral reward would be paid out, advocates could
reliably plan their monthly income around their referrals. Over the years,
some teachers stopped teaching altogether and generated their income
exclusively from referring teachers. A good referral system can do that.
The second significant advocate benefit is reputational. If you show to
your peers and your community that you use an expert tool to do your job
expertly, what will your peers think you are? An expert, of course. By
embedding the referral link into helpful content, many advocates show that
they know what they are talking about, and then benefit from people
following their advice by clicking the link.
The third advocate benefit is related to empowerment. It feels good to
help other people, and it forges relationships. I am still in contact with many
people who have referred business- and programming-related tools to me.
This is not because I saved a few dollars, but because I received their advice
and guidance, with the referral being a small part of it. They helped me
understand that things can be done better. They helped me grow. I feel good
knowing that my advice and suggestions are enabling other founders and
developers to become better at their craft.
What Benefits Does a Referral System Provide to New Users?
It is quite likely that your onboarding is not as effective as you think.
Prospective customers come to your landing page, some of them sign up,
some of those may use your product, and a few of them will eventually
subscribe.
Referrals are the duct-tape for your leaky funnel. A referred user comes
to your product with the expectation that if the advocate can use it, so can
they. There are a few incentives to sticking with a service that comes
referred, namely trust in a supposedly good product, the expectation of
savings down the line, and, most importantly, knowing that there is a real
person somewhere that they can ask if they run into trouble: the advocate.
How Does a Referral System Help Your Business?
The relationship between the new user and the referring advocate is
important, and shouldn’t be underestimated. In fact, it can be incredibly
useful to your business.
Let’s look at the example of Chinese online schools again. They built a
referral system that would show the advocate exactly where their referred
teachers were along their journey. And then, they would allow advocates
and new users to communicate through their platform. They encouraged
advocates to help and guide new teachers through their journey.
Essentially, they crowdsourced their onboarding to existing customers.
If you build a referral system where your experienced customers help the
new users get up to speed, you can significantly reduce the workload of
your customer service department. If you add a referral system on top of a
mature product, you can expect the most basic questions to be answered by
your advocates before the questions even make it into your customer
service tickets.
We built such a journey-tracking component into the FeedbackPanda
referral system. Advocates could see if their referred users accomplished
certain milestones, and where they struggled.
This kind of outsourcing also creates a permanent feedback loop about
the onboarding process and first-usage problems. Right after we released
the FeedbackPanda referral system, our advocates started reaching out,
telling us about where they had issues helping their referred users make
sense of the product. This allowed us to either change the product quickly
or provide better instructions through our knowledge base.
We also noticed higher retention rates in both cohorts, advocates and
referred users. We attribute this to the long-term reward for the new users,
and the easy-to-reach threshold of three referrals per month to perpetually
have a free subscription for advocates.
One of the most significant benefits of having this system turned out to
be the added insight we suddenly had into our customer base. With unique
referral codes, we could track where our new customers were most
receptive to marketing, and who among our customers would most actively
share their link in which social networks. That made the previously opaque
word-of-mouth marketing much more measurable.
We toyed with the idea of creating different referral codes per social
network but never followed through. The idea was to make the tracking
even more manageable, but we decided against that. This becomes
particularly cumbersome when you don’t create random referral codes but
use human-readable ones, such as the name of the customer or their
business.
The Risk of Fizzling Out: Is Your Service Shareable?
While referral systems are usually opt-in and can be ignored entirely, there
are several questions you might want to ask yourself before offering a
referral system.
Referral systems don’t work for all products or services. In fact, there
are many reasons why a referral system wouldn’t work well. A referral
system may fizzle out for one of these reasons:
My precious: Customers would lose their edge if they shared your
service. Think of a marketer finding a tool that allows them to
capture new hidden markets. Would they share their secret weapon
with other marketers?
Training wheels: Customers would admit to being a beginner if
they shared your service. People rarely admit they’re not good at
something.
Empty pockets: Customers would admit needing the savings from
the referral system. We don’t like admitting we can't afford
something. If sharing a link could make other people think we’re
cheap, we’d instead not share it.
Conversely, a referral system will work best for these reasons:
Network effects: Customers stand to gain something from another
user joining the service.
Reputation gain: Customers can show their peers that they are
experts in their industry.
Way above the bottom line: Customers can show that they are
doing well using your service.
For FeedbackPanda, we had a powerful network effect built into the
product: our customers could share their feedback templates with each
other. That meant that every new customer might bring fresh content that
the existing customers could use immediately. Inviting a new customer to
the website was a way to do less work eventually for our customers, so they
had no problem sharing the service. Our service also showed them in a
professional light: teachers who used FeedbackPanda were good teachers
and cared about their students. And finally, we could disregard the financial
aspect, as almost all teachers are well aware of their precarious financial
situation and don’t mind sharing bargains with each other.
The Risk of Feeling Icky: Will It Impact Genuine Mouth-to-Mouth
Marketing?
Once you’re sure that your product is inherently shareable, think about how
adding a referral system could change the conversations that already happen
organically. Often, a recommendation that happened naturally before now
can feel forced or sneaky.
If you can live with the fact that some of your prospects may be turned
off by incentivized sharing, then go right ahead. But if you have a very
sensitive niche, be very careful how and how much you recommend sharing
referral links.
And, with sufficiently large groups of people: you won’t be able to
please everyone. There will always be people who are seemingly allergic to
even the slightest sign of self-interest in their communities. We had a few
teachers complain about the referral system cheapening the genuine
messages of their peers. These kinds of purists cry out whenever they sense
the slightest trace of rewarded behavior. They will call their industrious
peers “shills,” accuse them of being “paid for this,” and generally be very
vocal about marketing that they think has no place in their community.
If your system works, ignore those people. They are not your audience.
Talk to the people who listen. Enable your most excited customers to spread
the word and make a little bit extra on the side. If your service is
outstanding, people will appreciate it.
We made sure we told our customers very clearly not to turn this into a
marketing frenzy. We asked them never to post the link by itself, but always
to add some helpful text or explanation of our product. We asked them to
respect the rules of their communities regarding product placement and
advertisement. In consequence, we received very few complaints from our
customers about upsetting their communities.
The Risk of Speaking Too Soon: Is It the Right Time to Add a
Referral System?
Earlier, we saw that sharing a referral link is always a risk to your
advocate’s reputation. What if they refer something of low quality? What if
they only share it because they can make a cheap buck? These valid
questions appear whenever a prospect is confronted with a referral link.
The best way to alleviate those fears is by providing a reliable product
that allows for a great initial experience.
That is not your MVP. Usually, this happens much later in the lifetime
of your business. In the Survival Stage, you try to find a repeatable business
model and build features into your product that make it better for your
customer. This phase is notorious for lots of trial and error. Lots of things
change. It’s definitely not a good time to have customers onboard other
customers, only to find what worked for them not working anymore.
Best wait until your product is stable enough for your user-facing
documentation not to change every week. That allows your advocates to
support their referred prospects more reliably.
Technical Choices
Like most things SaaS, you can either use an existing solution or build your
own. I built the FeedbackPanda referral system myself because I wanted to
create a very customizable system. In retrospect, this probably would not
have been necessary. Services like ReferralCandy, ReferralRock,
SaaSquatch, or Ambassador offer tools that are easy to integrate and allow
you to manage not just referrals, but also affiliates and partnerships.
In our case, we only wanted a simple system that was perfect for our
customers. This turned out to be quite some work. Not only did I need to
implement all the server-side logic to assign subscription extensions
correctly and discounted plans, but I also found myself fixing a large
number of frontend-related issues that stemmed from the tracking
technology needed to tell who referred whom reliably. If you prefer to
spend a few weeks building that instead of useful features, go for it. If
you’d instead focus on your strengths, use one of the services that already
solves all these problems.
If you use a third-party service, make sure you like the way they
integrate. Some use widgets, and some offer APIs. Work with a system that
fits with your long-term strategy.
When it comes to complexity, take a staggered approach. Your referral
system, just like your product, doesn’t need to be completely finished to be
useful. For example, we initially released the FeedbackPanda referral
system to track referrals, but not show the current stage of product adoption
to the advocate. It was more critical for us to gather feedback on the overall
system than providing every feature immediately.
The most important technical aspect of the system is that it reliably
tracks who refers whom. That’s all you need to start seeing the benefits.
Encouraging Your Customers to Become Advocates
We launched our referral system publicly, at the same time as increasing our
prices. That allowed us to announce both changes at the same time, in
tandem. With a month to go, we started reaching out to our customers
through an Intercom message and the weekly newsletter, explaining what
we’d be introducing and clearly stating the value proposition of using the
referral system.
We framed it as a way to help other teachers become better teachers
while saving a few dollars. That built sufficiently high anticipation that on
the day we released the referral system, there was a noticeable wave of
customers sharing their referral links. That prompted a lot of their peers to
become interested in what FeedbackPanda was, and those questions
summoned our evangelist customers to share their testimonials. People
were ready to do our marketing for us, and they did.
In your communication leading up to and after the launch, draw
parallels with other referral systems they may already know. It is a trust
transfer opportunity that can make a meaningful difference in the adoption
of your system. As our customers already knew a similar referral system
with the school they taught for, they knew it was in their interest to
participate.
We made sure we published clear step-by-step descriptions of how to
find their referral link and how to make it interesting for prospective
customers in several knowledge base articles. We used screenshots and
video tutorials to make it as easy as possible to understand. We also added a
very prominent interface element into the dashboard of our application to
make sure that the concept of referring customers was exposed to our
customers' field of vision every single day.
We chose that kind of communication over active recruiting. We didn’t
reach out to people directly, but we put it in front of them wherever we
could. A referral system should be optional, and only if a customer really
wants to support the service should they do it. We wanted our advocates to
refer new customers because they found it the right thing to do.
That doesn’t mean you can’t reach out to specific customers. In fact,
active recruiting is an excellent idea in tribal niches. We talked to a limited
number of our most socially active customers and recommended that they
try out the system to see if this would give them more insight into their
reach. That approach netted us a few excellent placements of links on
niche-specific blogs.
A Few Thoughts Regarding Tracking and Privacy
When it comes to tracking, I recommend you capture the whole journey if
possible, for maximum insight. Track the channels where your referrals
happen and who is most prolific at putting their referral link into those
channels. These are opportunities for partnerships that go beyond sharing a
link. You can quickly find an influencer that would like you to sponsor their
channels.
If you’re planning to have your advocates onboard your new customers,
make sure you restrict their communication in a way that keeps personally
identifiable information from leaking. Don’t share email addresses unless
your users explicitly agree with such a practice. The best case would be to
use an in-app messaging channel that allows you to control who talks to
whom.
Remember that not every business can benefit from adding a referral
system. It could even make the business look greedy when low-shareability
products are pushed through a referral system. Referral systems are meant
to support your marketing with an incentivized method of getting new users
to try out your product. Make sure your product is shareable, your rewards
incentivize your customers, and you provide plenty of information on how
they can communicate the benefits to prospective customers.
SURVIVING A RECESSION AS A
BOOTSTRAPPED BUSINESS
Just a few weeks after the beginning of the Coronavirus outbreak in early
2020, the first SaaS businesses were reporting cancellations. The
bootstrapped SaaS world may not have been affected by the pandemic as
much as other industries, but we saw second-order effects appearing
quickly.
For example, you may not be affected by a temporary closure of bars
and restaurants directly. Still, if you're running a business that sells to these
establishments or those they rely on, you'll see some changes in the future.
For SaaS businesses like OpenTable, this happened very quickly, as they
saw bookings going down 50% and more within days. This development
had a trickle-down effect into many adjacent industries, in the same sector
and beyond.
Online Sports Betting Platforms, a kind of business that did well in prior
recessions, found themselves in a tight spot at the beginning of the
pandemic. With most sports leagues suspended or canceled, their revenue
streams, which usually picked up when the economy tanked, started to
dwindle. No recession is the same, and what worked before won't
necessarily work reliably this time.
In reflecting on my own experiences of working in SaaS businesses
back in 2008 and the years after, I'll make a case for how bootstrappers can
approach setting up their businesses to withstand the up and downs of
increasingly interconnected global economies. I've compiled this into the
AAAH!-Framework, short for Awareness, Anticipation, Adaptation,
Healthy Optimism, and Action!: actionable steps to make sure you meet the
challenges of a recession.
Awareness: Accepting that Change Is Happening
It all starts with not looking the other way. Things are changing during an
economic downturn. The graveyards of the economy are riddled with
remnants of businesses that stared change in the face and decided to
continue business as usual. Don't try selling the things you already sell for
the price they always sold for and wonder why sales go down.
You don't have to understand or directly experience the reason for a
recession for it to affect you. Social upheavals happen to large groups of
people, and you'll be in it whether you want to be or not. Accept that change
is happening.
This is surprisingly hard for entrepreneurs, who are usually quick to
embrace change. It's the entrepreneurial curse: our boundless optimism
when it comes to the economy. If you think that things will work out
eventually, a few years of things not working so well are hard to imagine.
Economic downturns are scary. But just like a booming economy, they
are only times of change. You would react to more and more customers
knocking on your door when things are looking better and better. So why
not respond just as much when things are starting to look worse. Reframe
the chilling word "recession" as "things that impact your business that you
need to react to like anything else," and you’ll know what to do.
Awareness of change starts with you, the founder. If you have
employees, you will need to make sure they also operate from that
perspective. It won't do your business any good if you're working on
making the business recession-proof when your customer service agents
dismiss your customers' worries and questions. Team alignment will be
more important than ever, and it starts with operating in the same economic
reality.
It is in that reality that your business needs to survive. By accepting that
long-term change is ahead of you, you'll be able to address what needs to be
done without panicking.
Anticipation: Thinking About the Implications
Long-term changes can manifest in several ways. First and foremost,
money dries up in a recession. Budgets shrink, and expenses are cut.
Businesses will shrink themselves healthy, and if you're not essential to
their operations, you will lose them as a customer. This doesn't mean you
won't find different customers who need your product. It just means that
you should expect a shift in the composition of your customer portfolio.
Second, people are insecure and frightened of things getting worse. That
will translate into their willingness to make long-term commitments, both
as customers and as partners. Your customers will be more stressed than
usual, and less forgiving when it comes to issues, which will impact your
customer service load and the intensity of the work involved. Sales and
marketing will become less effective, first because the context in which
they happen has changed, and later due to increased risk perception in your
prospective customers.
Operational capabilities will change all over the place. In your business,
you could experience this in the shape of the team being less effective.
Employees may look for safer jobs, and contractors could stop freelancing
altogether. Services you depend on may make radical changes. Some could
go out of business. Your customers may experience a shift in their needs
and requirements that you will have to anticipate.
Here are a few things you might want to pay attention to and the
questions you will need to find answers to:
Legislative changes: How are governments reacting to the cause
and the consequences of the recession? How does this affect the
regulatory landscape?
Changes in technology: Are people using technology differently
during or as a result of the cause of the recession? Which outdated
preferences do you rely on? Do you need to realign your
messaging to reach people using these new technologies?
Market movements: Are purchasing patterns going to change
significantly? Will important players in the market thrive or suffer?
Is your niche still going to exist a year from now, or is it
transforming? Will the market be saturated, or will it expand?
Labor: How will unemployment impact the availability of talent
for your business? How quickly will unemployment rise? Are your
employees feeling safe with you? Will they look at other jobs?
Competition: Will there be more or less competition in your
industry? Are competitors failing? Why? Are there new
competitors springing up? What motivates them? Will funding
sources in your market dry up, or will investors spend more? What
kinds of businesses will they fund? Will businesses that were not
generating revenue because they had a lot of funding suddenly
have to make a profit in a way that impacts your market? Which
default-alive businesses are turning into default-dead?
The COVID-19 pandemic is a good example of how to anticipate these
types of changes. Governments responded to the pandemic with social
isolation policies, massively disrupting existing consumption patterns. As a
consequence of quarantine efforts, work-from-home became a necessity for
many, resulting in an explosive increase in the need for enabling
technologies like videoconferencing and collaboration tools. With school-
age children being forced to stay home as well, EdTech tools and
homeschool-related fields became much more interesting all of a sudden.
With people working from home and having their children around, a lack of
social connectivity tools designed for this purpose became clear. Companies
who had until recently only marginally served these fields started
intensifying their efforts to move into that market, increasing competition
among the available solutions. Other markets started drying up temporarily,
mostly in industries related to tourism and non-virtual entertainment.
Virtual entertainment businesses began to see sharp uptakes in usage, and
delivery businesses were overrun with orders.
All of this happened within the first few weeks of the COVID-19
pandemic. The long-term repercussions of this event are unclear at this
point, but the forces set in motion will result in lasting changes to
industries, professions, and personal lives.
Adaptation: Implementing a Response
You'll need to be on your toes to be able to react to changes quickly and
reliably during a recession. You can prepare for this by segmenting the
actions you'll need to take into two main categories: short-term activities
you can take right when a recession hits, and long-term activities that you
can expect to take during the downturn.
Short-Term Adaptations
The best antidote against money drying up is having it before it stops
moving. Your immediate goal when entering a recession should be to have,
or at least quickly build, reserve. Collect revenue as much as you can, as
soon as you can. Even if you need to discount them heavily, offer and
advertise yearly subscription plans. Give your customers a pay-ahead-of-
time offer that they can't refuse. You need more runway than usual over the
next months.
Try having at least three months of cash as if you had no revenue on
hand. That should be the minimum to aim for in order to buy yourself time
for impactful changes. If you're not yet profitable, double this to six months
of cash. In this case, turn on your revenue engine as soon as you can. Even
if it's terrible at the start, it's better than nothing. If you can get your revenue
working while people are spending less and less, it's a testament to your
entrepreneurial skill, and it can only improve from there. Get it started as
soon as humanly possible.
Focus on sales now, right this moment. You will need to land your
customers before they stop spending their money due to budget cuts.
Somewhere in the financial and controlling departments, people are dusting
off the old emergency budget cut plans. Get in there before the door closes.
Finally, a thing you can do right when you get into a recession is to cut
your own expenses. Cut all non-essential subscriptions. Even if it's a bit
more extra work, the costs for those services could mean the difference
between staying afloat for one more month or having to declare bankruptcy.
This is an excellent opportunity for some reflection: who could be doing
to your service what you are doing to all these non-essentials now? Which
companies may consider you a “nice-to-have” instead of a “must-have” that
is ready to be cut at a moment's notice when things look bleak? Think about
why that is, and how you can become the service that your customers
decide to keep in moments like this.
Having a reserve, focusing on sales early, and cutting expenses are good
practices in any kind of economic climate. When you're entering a
recession, these become necessities.
Another thing that is more important than ever at this point is to focus
on crystal-clear communication.
Be clear to your customers that you intend to stick around. Be explicit
about the measures you're taking to deal with the uncertainties of the
immediate 
future. 
Some 
customers 
may 
complain 
about 
your
communication because every service they use has something to say at that
point. I believe that as a customer myself, I'd rather ignore one more email
than having to wonder if the businesses I depend on are aware of what is
happening.
The reason you need to be extra clear is two-fold. Initially, you need to
soften the blow for people who are starting to realize that their mental
model of the world differs from reality. If you position yourself as someone
who began diligently preparing before they even considered the economic
change a problem, you will be regarded as a shining beacon of
perceptiveness and preparation. Later on, clear communication will be an
important indicator of you staying the course: if you're consistent and
understandable in your words and actions, you will build relationships of
trust with your team and customers. This kind of confidence can make the
difference between retaining a customer and having them cancel their
subscription. Being straightforward with your team can mean that they don't
start looking for other job openings elsewhere.
Long-Term Adaptations
Once you have taken these initial actions, you can start looking at what can
be done over the next few months to make sure you stay in good shape and
react to the changes that will undoubtedly occur. Here I mean two things:
problems and opportunities. Problems are the things we're most concerned
with when a recession hits. But opportunities will appear as well, and they
will be the antidote to your problems most of the time.
There will still be customers out there looking for solutions to their
problems, even when budgets are smaller, and people are cautious about
buying. That's why refining your position is vital during this time. Pay close
attention to what changes in the day-to-day lives and workflows of your
prospective customers. Learn from them about their fears and worries. If
those change, you will have to adjust your messaging to include them in the
catalog of problems you solve. If your product needs to be adjusted for this,
prioritizing that will enable you to help with newly found critical problems.
Look into your customer base to find which industries and customer
cohorts generate the most revenue for your business. Then, trace their
funding source and assess the risk of that drying up. After that, reach out to
customers who are in the groups that are most likely to continue to support
your business. In those calls, you find out how you can serve them even
better, and then focus on the learnings from those conversations.
During a recession, you want your product to be as simple and focused
as possible. Any cruft or untrimmed fat can be detrimental to your
prospect's willingness to buy. On the flip side of this, any support and help
they can get from you without needing to pay will create trust and goodwill.
Often, that translates into referrals and word-of-mouth marketing that
circumvents people's purchase risk calculations. If you have already helped
a prospect with a valuable piece of content or a free tool, they will be much
more likely to do business with you.
There are a few questions that you should reflect on when you're
navigating your business through a recession. Many of those questions don't
appear as often when things go well, so it could take some research to get to
a meaningful answer.
What are your strengths? Do you have any unfair advantages you
could capitalize on? How can you protect your upside?
What are your weaknesses? Where could competitors sweep in and
grab vital market share? How can you protect your downside?
Which category are you in? Which category should you be in? Has
there been a category shift? Will there be? Is your market still in
the Goldilocks zone: small enough to escape the competition but
big enough to support your business?
Is your positioning accurately reflecting the value of your service?
Could it be misunderstood due to changing circumstances?
How can your offer be more compelling? Is lowering prices an
option? What can you do beyond that to make purchasers feel safe
when choosing to buy your product? How can you get existing
customers to commit more to your business? What experiments
can you do to find these opportunities? Who can you have a
conversation with to find new avenues of talking to your
customers?
As a safety precaution, start looking into adjacent markets that overlap
some with your current model. If your business is threatened, you can pivot
and take your customers with you. In other cases, you may find excellent
opportunities to partner up and mutually promote each other's projects. In
times of need, band together. This is just as true for families as it is for
service providers in many industries.
Everything that can reduce the risk for your customers will help. It
means making your product more stable, offering more and better
guarantees, and finding alternative suppliers in case your supply chain is
impacted. If you see something happening within your niche, move along
with it. Don't resist where things are going. Align your business with the
trajectory of your customers' needs and requirements. Reduce ambiguity
where you can: be the scalpel, not the Swiss Army knife. Do one thing
really well, and have a clear value proposition that can help your customers
solve their critical problems.
Revisit your strategies and tactics regularly. Things change quickly,
particularly during the initial phases of a recession. There are weeks when
decades seem to happen. What was the right choice last month could
become damaging to your business by next week. Keep your messaging
under close observation. The sensibilities of people shift precariously, and
your marketing slogans from last week may be ignored today.
Healthy Optimism: Trust in Progress and the Good in Others
"This, too, shall pass." The one good thing about recessions is that they end.
They end because things turn around eventually. That doesn't happen by
chance. It happens because entrepreneurs believe that it can be done, and
then they just do it.
This trust needs to come from within you, the founder. You need to have
an inner compass that guides you through these times. Believing that your
business is doomed won't help you make the right choices to keep it afloat
until things are better. I've always been a very optimistic person myself, and
I think it's important to see the good in other people even when times are
tough, and they act from a place of fear and uncertainty.
Show empathy for other’s plight, guide them to make good long-term
choices, and supply the tools to do that. Remind them to focus their energy
on the things that provide value to people. Stay away from negativity, and
don't join the chorus of the alarmists. Be a voice of reason and productivity
that people can follow.
Stay confident in your ability to adapt to changing circumstances.
Create processes in anticipation of major shifts: how will you handle
increasing customer service workload when new regulations change
people's workflows overnight? What happens when your crucial employee
gets sick and has to stay home for weeks? Prepare for contingencies like
that, and they won't be more than small bumps on the road for your
business.
Be generous; don't fire your employees if you can avoid it. Ask for
people to take a pay cut, which is often called the "Recession Discount,"
and pay it back when things are better. Show your workers that you're in
this for the long run. They will stick with you if they see a future in your
company. With a healthy dose of optimism that resonates through your
actions, you will create the required alignment to get through the recession
together. Tough times will eventually be over, but tough people remain.
Band together even closer with your team and your customers, and you'll be
able to weather the storm.
Act Deliberately, But Act
One of the most important things to do when you're entering a recession is
to overcome analysis paralysis. Technical founders are particularly prone to
decisional perfectionism, and that can ruin your business more than ever
when you're facing a recession.
Don't act rashly, but act. Take a day for reflection. Work on your
awareness and acceptance of the changes to come. Make sure you have
answers to all the questions regarding the future of your niche, your
customers, your business, and your own personal life.
Reflect on these things thoroughly, but try to keep yourself from doing
mental gymnastics. Nobody knows what the future will hold; we're all
giving our best guesses. If you approach your business systematically, you
will increase the chance to emerge from this recession successfully.
Make notes on how you came to your conclusions. What could seem
perfectly reasonable today may never again be in the future. If possible,
make a recording of your train of thought in audio or video form. You may
need to revisit a lot of your assumptions later, and it will help to jog your
memory at that future point in time.
Let your reflections stay with you for a day or two. Recessions usually
last for months and years; there is no harm in giving your brain a day or two
to process your thoughts.
After that, get right to work. There will be a lot to do.
MARKETING AND SALES
SPREADING THE WORD: MARKETING ON A
SHOESTRING BUDGET
Building a product is not enough. No matter how good your product is,
if nobody knows where to find it, you don't have a business. Spreading the
word is an essential part of running a business, and so is convincing
potential customers to try the product and eventually purchase it.
Many founders are scared of sales and marketing. They feel that
customers are out of their league or that an unexperienced approach to
marketing might confuse new prospects. "If only the product could speak
for itself," they think. Well, it does not. You will have to speak for it. But
you can do it on your own terms.
We will look into the proven methods and strategies of marketing your
service in the early phases of your business. You will also learn where you
can find help and support from other founders, how much of your journey
you can safely share, and what benefits you have as a bootstrapper that you
may not be aware of yet.
One beautiful thing about a niche is that there is a certain similarity
among the people in it. They are likely to frequent the same social media
forums, read the same blogs, visit the same websites. They often are
organized in communities where word of mouth spreads quickly.
You can leverage the density of these networks by becoming a part of
them. Genuinely participate in niche communities. Don’t just use them as a
marketing platform. Contribute before you advertise. Better, don’t advertise
at all, create meaningful content around your product, and share that in a
way that is helpful to people even without engaging with the product
directly.
Three components are essential to spreading the word efficiently, and
they all interact with each other: tribes, water coolers, and word of mouth.
And they are all quite affordable.
The Power of Tribes
You want to become part of and eventually lead a tribe. Tribes are
communities that long for connection and shared interests, and members of
a tribe follow the same community leaders. Facilitate more connection or
satisfy people’s interests, and you will be a voice in the community that
your potential customers will listen to.
Tribes form around all kinds of topics. Some are obvious in our day-to-
day lives, like fans of sports clubs. Others are extremely niche and highly
virtual, like some obscure internet forum of indoor gardeners in Germany.
But they are essentially the same: they all revolve around a central interest,
and people talk about it with each other.
This makes tribes a great audience for your product. A very
homogenous audience can be marketed to quite easily, as you know exactly
where you can reach them and what language they speak.
The Power of the Water Cooler
Find the water cooler. The locations where your customers congregate when
they are not hard at work can provide insightful information, as people talk
more freely there than in professional circles.
Most of these water coolers are found in social networks like Facebook
or Twitter. Reddit is a perfect place to look, as the sheer amount of specific
subreddits makes it quite likely that there will be a vibrant community for
your niche audience. Tribes are notorious for having very active water
coolers, and once you find one, becoming a member is very worthwhile.
Listen to what people ask and complain about and offer your product
embedded in more general advice. Shameless promotion is usually frowned
upon in these communities, so you will need to provide something helpful
and meaningful along with your plug. It is beneficial to become an actual
member of the community before doing any intentional marketing. This
will help you learn the language of the tribe and give you a chance to
communicate with people, establishing yourself as a genuine member of
their group.
Water coolers are wonderful for your content marketing in two ways.
Initially, you will have the opportunity to see what your audience is
interested in because that's the content with which they share and engage.
Once you've understood what works for them and what does not, you can
create content that you can be sure your audience will enjoy. Since you've
already been a member of the community for a bit, you can provide quality
content and market your product at the same time.
The Power of Word of Mouth
Word of mouth is the highest-converting way of spreading the word.
Convince people to convince others and give them the tools to do so. Create
easy-to-consume and easy-to-share content that existing customers can
forward to new prospects. Allow them to mentor their peers into using your
product by adding means to connect inside the product. This works
particularly well with a referral system.
Word of mouth works mostly for low-touch businesses. Because these
companies have a large number of customers and prospects that can take a
look at a product through easy and self-service signups, word of mouth can
happen without your intervention or encouragement.
In high-touch businesses, word of mouth works differently. Most of the
time in B2B industries, your product is not very shareable because it gives
an edge to the businesses that use it. Instead of everyone in the industry
talking about your product, you want everyone in the businesses you would
like as customers to talk about your solution before you reach out through
direct sales.
There is one thing about word of mouth that you need to be aware of.
You have almost no means to censor or steer the conversation. If there is
something negative about your business, communities and tribes will
discuss it. For many founders, hearing people complain about their service
feels painful, but it's a normal part of the business. In the end, even a neutral
or negative conversation will keep your brand on the minds of your
prospects and remind them of the fact that you're at least trying to help.
Your Most Effective Marketing Strategy: Helping Your Tribe
Unlike large agencies, bootstrapped founders usually don't want to spend
tens of thousands of dollars per month on social media advertisements. That
doesn't mean you can't leverage social media for your marketing. Quite the
opposite: a well-executed social media strategy can outperform pay-per-
click ads significantly—it definitely did for us at FeedbackPanda.
We also experimented with paid ads, of course. And we didn't see any
additional engagement compared to our existing content marketing and
outreach strategies. So we doubled down on that, and it was the right choice
for us.
And, there was a very basic assumption underpinning all of the
marketing efforts: it's not about pushing a message into an audience of
receivers, and hoping for signups conversions. It's about fostering a
community that is eager to spread your messages, building your brand, and
gaining recognition and reputation. To accomplish that, you have to focus
on building a community first, and also optimizing your messaging. You
need to help your tribe grow stronger, and they will be an amplifier for your
messages.
If you're fortunate enough to sell to a very focused niche that is at best a
highly active tribe or at worst a loose community, here are a few ways you
can help them:
Facilitate communication. Allow for more connections between
the people in your niche. Enable existing communities or build one
yourself using community software like Circle.so or Tribe.so.
Interview leaders in the community on your blog, giving them
more reach and their voices more impact. Interview members of
your community, showcasing both their uniqueness and their
belonging to the tribe at the same time. Syndicate user-generated
content on your blog. Turn regular tribe members into influencers
through your outlets.
Facilitate exchange. From day one, envision your product to have
a component where your users can share something. It can be data,
insights, best practices, support, frankly anything. Give your users
a chance to empower each other, and they will be sure to increase
their impact radius by carrying your service to their peers. Offer
free resources from inside the community, and share your content
with other outlets in the niche.
Produce and syndicate valuable content. No matter if you're
producing a podcast, regular blog posts, a video series, or you
write articles with ratings, reviews, and testimonials: as long as
you provide helpful and meaningful content for your niche, you
will have followers that spread it. As your content is written for
your customers, any new reader will likely be an excellent
candidate to become a new customer as well.
All of this generates trust. Trust is the currency of tribes, and with
enough trust, people want to listen to you. You don't need to spend money
on marketing, and frankly, you couldn't buy this kind of relationship with
your customers if you wanted to.
Use the fact that you're selling to a niche audience to your advantage
and become a leader in your tribe. Help it grow, help your community
members to learn and get ahead. This way, you'll end up with a never-
ending stream of eager customers who trust you and amplify your
messages.
SELLING AS A BOOTSTRAPPER: BEWARE OF
THE WHALES
Sales works differently for bootstrapped founders. While there are
many useful resources out there like the SalesForFounders Course by
Louis Nicholls, effective sales can be condensed into a few main points. I'll
leave this to the experts, and only talk about a few learnings that I
personally had when it came to sales.
You don't have time or the resources to sell prospective customers what
they want. You will need to sell them what they will buy. Big companies
with huge R&D budgets can afford to sell their prospective customers a
vision and then turn that into reality. As a bootstrapper, you will need to sell
what you already have.
The only exception to this is early adopter customers. They are more
likely to accept that a newly created product is missing a few features. Your
early customers often understand that certain things are unfinished when
they sign up. But don't get complacent: the moment you market to
mainstream customers, you will only be able to sell what is there.
Don't promise the world to customers just to get their money: with
limited resources, you run the risk of overcommitting. The agility of your
bootstrapped business comes from your ability to change course and
quickly respond to customer needs. If you're locking in a roadmap for your
customers just to get them on board, you risk being unable to pivot and
adapt to new circumstances.
Many small businesses have been derailed by selling to just a few big
customers, only to turn into their personal custom development shops. If
you value your independence, go after a large number of smaller customers
instead of just a few big ones. While it's a great joy to see a single customer
pay thousands of dollars at once, it puts you at their mercy.
If a single customer can threaten to destroy half of your business's
revenue by talking about canceling, are you sure you can still make the
choice that is best for your business instead of caving in and fulfilling their
wishes? Having so many customers that a few of them canceling barely
makes a dent in your revenue is a great way to de-risk your business, and it
completely changes your sales conversations. Where before you would
throw yourself at new customers, blinded by the great increase in revenue
they may bring, you take a soberer stance when a single customer only
marginally increases your MRR. There will be much less pressure, and a
much less pronounced power distance.
Like all things in your bootstrapped business, you want your sales
process to be as streamlined as possible. Learn from every sales call you
conduct. Assess if your process is still optimal for your business whenever
you get a "yes" or a "no." It is the interaction with real people that will give
you insight into what's working or what isn't. Getting a "no" is great: here
goes a customer that would not get enough value from your product if they
had said "yes."
Every "no" shows you what people need that you don't yet provide. The
more conversations like that you conduct, the more you learn. If your target
audience only consists of a few large customers, you have very few
opportunities ever to get this kind of information. This form of direct
validation is very valuable and is only accessible if you're actually talking
to your prospective customers.
BEING SMALL IS A BENEFIT: LEVERAGING SIZE
AS A BOOTSTRAPPER
Many founders feel they need to act bigger than they are. They expect
only to be taken seriously when they appear to be a mature company. It
turns out that this is no longer the case in many industries.
Depending on the size of your customers, the fact that you are a small
business with few, if any, employees can be incredibly useful. If you are
selling to individual customers or are in a B2BC market where your
customers are tiny companies or freelancers, the fact that you're not just
another faceless corporate entity will be a most welcome surprise. People
treat you differently when you show that you're in the market because you
care.
At FeedbackPanda, we communicated clearly from the beginning that it
was just Danielle and me running the company. Our customers even took up
the work of correcting other people publicly when they assumed we were a
larger business. That always kept the founders relatable. We were just like
our customers: real people solving real problems. This kind of relationship
allowed us to mess up from time to time, only to encounter a lot of goodwill
and understanding.
Bootstrapped founders and their businesses are different from other
enterprises in a few key ways, and each of those can be used to your
maximum advantage.
Bootstrappers have skin in the game. They can't hide behind a
corporate facade. Reputation is important to them and the success of their
businesses. Customers understand that once they are dealing with a
bootstrapped, they can expect more than "business as usual."
If you're selling to a niche that understands the bootstrapping life, such
as the startup market, you will also encounter this behavior. In the end, it
boils down to honesty. Can you reliably deliver the levels of service that
your customers expect? If you explain from the beginning that you are a
solopreneur and that may mean that the service can be shaky when you're
not there to fix it, you will allow your prospects to pre-sort themselves. You
wouldn't want to have a customer you cannot yet serve anyway. Once the
business enters the Stability Stage, you can change your messaging to
attract those customers.
Leverage having skin in the game like this:
Be clear about being a bootstrapper. Don't go for sympathy; go
for comprehension. When a customer complains about a bug, don't
say, "It's just me, so this will take a while," instead tell them that
you'll personally get on it right after the conversation. Convey that
their direct feedback matters.
Appeal to early adopters by using their language. In the early
stages of your journey, using labels like "pre-release," "beta," and
"prototype" will attract innovators and early adopters while it will
keep mainstream customers at bay.
Be public about your journey. Talk to other founders, no matter if
they are your audience or not. Share your story, leave traces.
People who care to find them will follow your journey and support
you because they know how important this is for you. They will
respond to your questions when you need an external perspective,
and they will spread information about your journey to those who
will listen.
Bootstrappers have nothing to lose. We don't have insane amounts of
capital. We don't have hordes of employees we need to employ securely. We
are flexible and can adapt to changing circumstances in the industry we
serve much faster than established companies that cling to the status quo. If
a prospect chooses your service, they can be assured that you will do
whatever it takes to keep making your product better at solving their critical
problems.
Leverage having nothing to lose like this:
Show the journey of your product proudly. Document and
publish the evolution of your product, your business, and your
entrepreneurial perspective.
Celebrate features, pivots, and improvements. Blog about things
that make a difference in your customers' lives, and be proud of it.
Your agility is your advantage. Communicate this with your
prospects.
Bootstrappers have everything to lose. While our agility makes us
very adaptable, it also prohibits us from entrenching ourselves too much:
other bootstrapped businesses may spring up and start competition. For that
reason, we're forced to build as stable and reliable a business as possible.
For many founders, that means dedicating every minute of the day to the
product and its customers. If a prospect chooses to buy from you, they can
expect you to work your hardest to get and retain their business.
Leverage having everything to lose like this:
Celebrate your challenges. Don't hide the bad and only talk about
the good. Share what worked and what didn't with the founder
community. Customers will do their research, and when they find
that you work hard on finding the best way to go forward, that will
create a lot of goodwill.
Share your struggles and growth as an entrepreneur. You don't
have a gigantic safety cushion and utopian exit bonuses when you
leave the business. If your business fails, so will you. By showing
how you deal with problems and reliably overcome them, you're
projecting confidence and that you're in it for the long run.
Bootstrappers are laser-focused experts. One consequence of having
access to very little capital and no employees in the beginning is that a
bootstrapped business usually solves one thing really well and nothing else.
For that, the founders have to be or become experts in their fields. When
your prospects see your business, they don't see a giant corporation with
dozens of unrelated products that it's trying to force on every possible
customer, whether they need it or not. They see a purpose-built business
that is working tirelessly on offering a product that solves a critical problem
for a well-defined audience, with a founder that knows what they are doing.
Leverage being a laser-focused expert like this:
Show your expertise by writing. Have a blog, write regularly, and
write about what you know. Be a voice in your niche audience that
people will follow.
Get interviewed on podcasts. Nothing shows your expertise level
more than a fruitful discussion with another expert in the industry
you serve. Promote the episodes when they get released with your
audience.
Bootstrappers are steering the ship. Founders not only envisioned the
business they run, but they are operating and improving it every day. Often,
a customer reaching out to customer service will be talking to the founder
of the company. Unlike a rank-and-file employee at a large faceless
corporation, founders have a large stake in the outcome of every interaction
with customers, so they will pour their heart into every single interaction
with each customer. You can use your direct connection with customers to
turn a stressful customer service chat into a delightful trust-building
opportunity.
Leverage steering the ship like this:
Be present and empathetic every time. A great customer service
interaction will stay on people's minds for a long time, and they
will talk about it to their peers.
Follow through on promises. When interacting with partners and
large customers, you, as the founder, can use your command of the
business as a credible argument as to why you can guarantee
certain things. No confirmations and verifications are needed when
you're the one both promising and delivering things.
Bootstrappers are relatable. In most families, you can find an
entrepreneur. It's a grandfather who was laid off from a job in the factory
and started his own business. It's an aunt who decided to turn a hobby into a
business and is now employing a handful of people. We all know someone,
a relationship or an acquaintance, who decided to start their own thing.
Your customers will, too. By making it clear that you are a person running a
business, their expectations and capacity for understanding will increase
significantly. In a way, you are an underdog, just like their dad was when he
started the family business. You're someone who cares, like their sister-in-
law, when she quit her high-paid-but-unfulfilling office job to start a project
that helped real people with real problems.
Leverage this level of relatability like this:
Prominently show the person behind the business, directly on
your landing page or in an About page. Make the business about
yourself; use your personal brand and motivation to be more
relatable.
Share the origin story of the business both through your
business communication and outside of it, in interviews and on
social media. People love narratives, and nothing is more
attractive than a rags-to-riches underdog story in the making.
When interacting with your customers, use a real-life picture
for your user avatar and use your full name. Engage with
people on a personal level, as the engaged founder, not the distant
business owner.
Use your agility and nimbleness as a bootstrapper to your advantage.
Present yourself to the world as a real person, with all the shortcomings and
problems that every one of your customers encounters in their own lives.
TOO MANY EYES: WHY BOOTSTRAPPED
COMPANIES STOP BEING TRANSPARENT
(EVENTUALLY)
When Buffer started being radically transparent, the entrepreneurial
community was enthusiastic. A brighter future of collaboration, shared
learning, openness, and lifting the disadvantaged was on the horizon.
Revenue, Salaries, Compensation: everything was made public for
everyone to see. Recently, Buffer closed off their public revenue dashboard.
Other bootstrapped companies such as Transistor.fm have gone through the
same progression of opening and later closing off their revenue data. Why
is that?
Two common patterns emerge when you read the explanations and
comments made by those who resorted to turning off their public
dashboards. Either the data is incomplete and paints a picture that is
distorting the reality of the business, or the publicly available information
gives the competition a one-sided information advantage.
Transparency in the bootstrapped world became a widely appreciated
topic when Buffer made their salary and revenue information public starting
in 2013, talking publicly about their numbers and values on the Open
Buffer blog. Many interviews and news articles followed, lauding the bold
move toward transparency as a blueprint for how a successful business
should be talking about how much it pays its employees and how much
revenue it generates.
Many companies followed their example. The Baremetrics Open
Startups page filled up with other SaaS businesses committing to publicly
sharing their revenue information.
Yet, after a while, some businesses stopped sharing their numbers. Some
of those reversions have happened in recent months. The most prominent
example is Buffer, who dropped from the Baremetrics Open Startups page.
It most recently happened again when Transistor.fm made their revenue
information private after having shared it publicly for over a year.
While Buffer have been almost ironically private about not being public
anymore, Transistor.fm were much more transparent about not being
transparent anymore. On their podcast, Build Your SaaS, Justin and Jon
talked about going public with their revenue information in May 2018.
Then, in November 2019, they laid out the arguments about why they
turned off their publicly available dashboard and revenue numbers.
The Transistor.fm story sheds some interesting light on why companies
choose to be radically transparent. The motivation to start sharing business
internals with the public happens for a few reasons:
Social proof: Fellow entrepreneurs, potential customers, and even
investors can see that your numbers are real: your financials are
right there for everyone to see. This builds a lot of trust in a world
where everyone is inflating their numbers to appear bigger and
more successful than they truly are.
Public accountability: You’re motivated to increase the numbers,
not to have growth stalling. Someone, somewhere, is watching
you. People will keep up with your success or lack thereof. If you
commit to goals publicly, stakeholders have the means to track
your progress. While this can be the source of high anxiety, it can
also energize and encourage you to work toward your goals even
more.
People love underdogs: You will find a lot of goodwill and
support when people can see that your little company is doing its
best to grow and become an established business. Advice and help
will appear in unexpected ways. Customers will root for you, as
they may also be a small business trying to make it. In the end, this
kind of transparency is marketing. You’re marketing the business
as a real company led by a real person. This kind of intimacy does
not exist for most business relationships, and people will relate to
your business differently than to an opaque, faceless, anonymous
company.
The “whisper network” effect: By being transparent about your
numbers, you equalize the playing field: historically disadvantaged
groups and minorities benefit from things being in the open. This is
particularly effective if you share salary information, as well.
When Buffer opened up their salary information to the public, they
were overwhelmed with resumes. People love an employer who is
publicly transparent.
With all these benefits, what then would cause a business to stop
sharing? Wherever you look, it seems to be one unifying problem:
competition.
Every single one of your competitors can look into your numbers. They
can see what happened when you pushed out your big marketing campaign,
as they will see the immediate impact in your numbers. They can find out if
your recent pricing changes worked for you or didn’t work.
Essentially, you are giving your non-transparent competition the
information advantage. You can only see your own numbers, but they get to
see yours and their own. They get your learnings without sharing their own
struggles.
Transparency may even encourage people to start a competing business
because they see you not paying attention to a part of your business. A
segment of your customers may be churning more than others because the
product does not fully align with their needs. Competitors may find that
information in your data before you do.
It may even encourage copycats that will chip away at your primary
customer base. While copycat businesses don’t have the same drive,
determination, and experience that you have, giving people actionable
information such as how your subscription plan levels are working for your
audience is a risk. You paid dearly experimenting with your plans, just for
someone to copy your business model with all those learnings for free.
That is a lot of risk for minimal upside. It breeds anxiety if you always
wonder who may be scheming against you after having analyzed your data.
Don’t mistake this for paranoia. In a time where a SaaS business is easy to
set up, this is a realistic scenario. It’s just too many eyes looking at and
probing your business. It is a distraction for founders who would prefer to
work on their business instead of wondering who may be inspecting their
numbers.
That’s what happened to Transistor.fm. For Jon and Justin, it felt like
they had to justify having their numbers in the open. With public scrutiny
come expectations. Justin didn’t want to be a performer anymore, caring
more about the public image than the actual value the business provided.
I can understand this completely. At FeedbackPanda, we did share our
revenue numbers on IndieHackers. Still, we never went fully public with all
of our revenue, churn, retention, and subscription details being available
like on the Baremetrics Open Startup page. The public MRR was enough
for us to attract interested parties. However, any would-be competition
didn’t have any additional insight.
Sometimes, it’s the nature of the business that makes accurate and
comprehensible transparency practically impossible. When Tyler Tringas
had the business metrics for Storemapper in the open, it quickly became
apparent that they were showing an incomplete picture. So, he turned off
the public dashboard again.
There can also be too much transparency. Not just because there is
competition, but also because numbers don’t exist in a vacuum. Let’s say
you have a 16% churn over a 30-day period. What does this mean? Did a
large number of customers cancel? Did you weed out a few accounts that
were abusing the system? Did you increase prices, and while a lot of people
churned, you still made 200% profit on the ones that stayed?
The numbers are not enough. They can be misleading or meaningless.
Radical transparency is highly contextual, and without knowing the context,
the figures can lead to misunderstandings. For a young bootstrapped
business, this context may be quite clear, as most bootstrapped
entrepreneurs go through the same struggle. However, once you grow to a
specific size, some factors are unique to your business, your niche, your
customer base. Those may not be apparent to you, so how could a person
who knows very little about your business understand those complex
interactions?
So what should a bootstrapped founder do?
I recommend being transparent but in a measured way. Share your
Stripe-verified revenue on IndieHackers, and regularly communicate what’s
going on in your business. Create a narrative that gives context to the
numbers. Share successes and failures. Keep people who are interested in
the business updated with regular summaries. Every month, talk about what
worked, what didn’t, how the important numbers moved.
Make sure having those numbers out there does not detract from your
overall goal of building a sustainable, life-changing business. Because in
the end, transparency is not the goal. It is secondary to you achieving a life
of independence and control.
Transparency is a great way to show that you are a real person working
on a sustainable business. Let the numbers work for you instead of you
working for the numbers. Just like you want the business to work for you
instead of you working for the business.
THE STABILITY STAGE
THE STABILITY STAGE AND YOU
There will be a point when your business starts getting along fine. You
have built a product that works well for your customers. You've found a
pricing model that generates sufficient revenue to pay for the business.
Maybe you've committed to the business full-time, and you can already pay
yourself a salary.
The important part is that you've built a business that has survived long
enough to establish repeatable processes around your product and your
business. Now is the time to optimize those processes for scaling. You will
need to develop methods and approaches that can deal with much larger
numbers of interactions and transactions at this stage.
Developing processes is scary for first-time entrepreneurs, and it feels
like something that would reduce your agility and capacity to adapt to
changes. You'll learn that it's quite the opposite: by implementing processes
and Standard Operating Procedures, you will turn your business into a more
flexible, less mistake-prone, and altogether more sellable company.
In this stage, you will work on automating the internal processes of the
business. You'll be streamlining these operations into resilient and
transferable processes so that you can have a well-positioned company that
looks good to potential partners and has opportunities for sustainable
growth. Finally, you will build long-term relationships with customers and
turn the business into a brand with a tribe.
BUILDING RELATIONSHIPS: WORKING
WITH CUSTOMERS
In the beginning, you had a few customers, your innovators and early
adopters. They were with you from the start, and they understood your
business at that point: a work-in-progress, with things that worked and
things that didn't. These customers came for your vision and stayed because
you continued to deliver.
Throughout the Survival Stage, you will have added many more to your
customer base, and you will find more and more customers who don't share
the early-adopter sentiment anymore. These mainstream customers expect
things to be perfect at all times. They will threaten to cancel if their needs
are not fulfilled as soon as they voice them. Mainstream customers will
require you to talk to them differently.
Altogether, your customer base will grow both in size and in diversity.
You will have to deal with diverging expectations and requirements and still
deliver the value you've been delivering so far.
You will need to implement systems that will allow you to stay in touch
with your customers in a meaningful way without distracting you from
growing your business. Customer service, customer success, and customer
retention are very important to get right during this stage.
CUSTOMER SERVICE AT SCALE: HELPING
THOSE WHO HELPS THEMSELVES
With an increasing number of people paying for your product, your way
of interacting with them will also change: you can't reach out to every
single customer individually anymore. Where you were able to chat at
length with your earliest customers, you will now have to be brief.
It's great to have a conversation with someone if you are trying to find
out how your first version of the product is perceived. You don't need to
talk about this at length if you already have 500 customers who have been
paying for that product for months. While you still want to check in
regularly, it's not required every single time you talk to a customer.
Every customer will still expect to be taken as seriously as your earliest
adopters, likely even more. But your attention only goes so far. While real-
time support was easy to manage when the likelihood of parallel
conversations was low, it becomes very hard to manage at scale.
Transitioning from Synchronous to Asynchronous and Self-Help
If you run a business that has a lot of incoming help requests, your best bet
is to look extensively at asynchronous and self-help-based support systems.
A knowledge base is an incredibly helpful tool at any scale, but it is
required once you reach a certain size. Being able to explain a problem
once and making the solution available to all who ask the same question in
the future is very valuable. If you do this for every question that is often
asked, it will significantly reduce the time spent on responding to those
requests.
At FeedbackPanda, we made a point of turning answers to questions
that could be answered with step-by-step instructions into knowledge base
articles immediately after the conversations were over. Every day, one or
two new articles would appear in the knowledge base. Using Intercom,
these articles would be automatically suggested whenever the next customer
would ask a question related to the words in the title.
Additionally, we trained the Intercom AnswerBot feature to respond to
particularly pressing questions with automated step-by-step responses. That
helped us help users who needed immediate assistance with login issues,
payment failures, or blocked accounts. For a company that never hired a
customer service representative for the night shift, this automation let us
sleep at night—until it didn't.
Speaking the Language
You and your employees must understand the subtleties of your customer
niche's psychology. Accountants approach solving problems differently than
artists. Aligning the customer service voice to the customers' psychology
will prevent a lot of misunderstandings and allow you to continue building
your brand even when customers are frustrated and helpless.
You can learn this customer-side language fairly quickly by doing a
customer interview in which you ask them to use your software and explain
what they are doing. Complete a couple of interviews, and you'll see
overlaps in how certain actions are described, what words are used, and
how processes are conceptualized. Be sure to make this available to
everyone in the business who is in regular contact with customers. Having
access to material that allows your team to be more empathetic to your
customers will be of massive benefit to your external presentation.
Getting Help
Never hiring help at FeedbackPanda was a mistake. With more customers
signing up for our service, the count of those who didn't get their questions
answered by the automation or couldn't find adequate help through the
knowledge base increased. Every morning, there were a few unanswered
messages, often portraying the desperation with which customers had tried
to reach out only to not find help. I thought we could deal with this alone,
but in retrospect, it was a mistake. Just because it's not a full-time job just
yet doesn't mean you can't look for help.
It is essential to hire a customer service representative eventually. Find
the time of day that statistically has the most incoming tickets, find a person
whose working hours fall into the that time zone. If you can find your
customer support rep from within your existing customer base, you can be
sure they understand both the product and the customer perspective. If not,
allow your newly hired customer service rep to spend some time with your
customers.
With someone taking all the customer service conversations, you will
have peace of mind, in two ways: first, you know that your customers are
taken care of, and second, you know that if there is any problem that
requires your intervention, a person will try to get in touch with you. While
automated systems are often used for alerts, nothing beats someone who
can contextualize a situation while they inform you about it.
We didn't hire for customer service until after we had sold
FeedbackPanda. During the transition phase, as we handed over the
company, we had to hire replacements for our position. When I trained the
customer service rep that our acquirer hired, all the preparations we had
made paid off. With all our help-desk articles and documented processes, it
only took a few days to get them up to speed. It was a revelation to me
when my anxiety about getting the customer service done dropped to zero
within a few days of having someone else dealing with it. We should've
hired much earlier.
CUSTOMER EXPLORATION: SEEING THROUGH
YOUR CUSTOMER’S EYES
At this stage of your business, you have a mostly mature product that is
used by many customers. You can expect that for most of their use cases, it
is good enough. But instead of guessing, I recommend setting aside some
time every few months to do some customer exploration.
Consider it to be Continuous Validation of the customer-facing
properties of your service. Just like you need to make sure your expenses
are not growing beyond what you can afford, you need to regularly check if
your product still solves your customers' critical problem sufficiently.
This is best done by incentivizing customers to jump on a screen-share-
based video call that you can record. Service credit or an Amazon gift card
can work wonders here, depending on the kind of customer. As long as it's
something valuable to them, either money, time, or reputation, it will help
you get them on board.
The Good, the Bad, and the Unaware
It's hard to find the right customers to make sure the feedback you'll receive
is as unbiased as possible. That's where the three-pronged approach works
well as it allows you to find the extremes and the overlaps. First, find the
customers that had the most trouble with your product and watch them use
it for a while. Then, do the same with volunteer customers who have not
reached out about problems. Finally, talk to a few customers who usually
rave about the product and share it with their peers.
You will find a lot of known issues, but there will also be surprising
ones: often, the customers who don't complain may still be struggling and
using the product in strange, unexpected ways. You will never find those
behavior patterns unless you catch your customers exhibiting them.
This method often surfaces any disconnects in feature presence and
feature usage. It allows you to revise your roadmap and fine-tune your
feature prioritization framework.
It will allow you to improve the affordance that your features show, and
it will lead to a better user interface.
Be sure to include the customers who exposed the problem in the
deliberation about potential solutions. That level of involvement will often
turn them into brand ambassadors, providing a powerful brand
reinforcement effect in your niche community.
What to Ask During a Customer Exploration Call
I suggest taking every call as a completely fresh opportunity to look into the
life of this particular customer. It's a form of qualitative analysis, so don't
expect to get any meaningful numbers. What you're looking for are
imbalances and opportunities.
Set expectations. The first thing you should tell your customers after
thanking them for joining is that this is a space where they can be as critical
as they want to be. You're looking for things that don't work, not for praise.
Just like with your audience, problem, and validation calls in the
Preparation Stage, you need your customers to point out the malfunctions,
pains, and issues. Make sure they understand that they can help you most by
pointing out as many problems as possible.
Ask for an unbiased walkthrough. Make your customers use the
product to solve their problem under your observation, best through screen
sharing. Ask them to explain to you what they're doing. Act as if you were
someone who is seeing the product for the first time. What works well here
is asking your customer to explain it as if you were a colleague. The idea
here is to remove any bias toward you. The video part of this will be
incredibly useful. You can see how quickly customers pick up interface
actions and how they interact with your product.
After the walkthrough, ask what pains them. Which needs are not
fulfilled? Where are costs too high? Where do they spend more time than
they'd like? This is an excellent opportunity for them to reflect on the
actions they just took and discover where reality was disconnected from the
expectations they might have had.
Ask for alternatives. Are there alternative products that offer a solution
to their problems? If so, how do they differ from your product? If your
product didn't exist, how would your customer solve their problem right
now? You're trying to find out everything you can about the job-to-be-done.
Beware that this is likely speculation and not overly realistic, but it should
give you some insight into the order of magnitude that your product is
helping them. If their alternative is just a little bit harder to accomplish,
you'll need to step up your game.
Ask for missing critical features. Most of the time, customers will be
content with the scope of your product. But then there are the times when
everything changes. A new law requires providing a new report or
document, and your current solution doesn't yet offer it. A good example of
this is offering downloadable invoices. This won't be a first-rate feature
when you start your business, but it definitely will become critical come tax
season. Listening to your customers voice their dissatisfaction with the
absence of some features can guide you into how much they need
something.
Ask for nice-to-haves last. Often, those features are quickly built or
already in the works. It's a good way to end a conversation with a customer,
as the focus is on something positive yet non-critical. The chances of
something important surfacing here are low, but you never know: your
customer may have particular needs they are unaware of, and what they'd
like to see may uncover something new.
Repetition Is Key
So how often should you do this? It depends on how many resources you
want to invest in this kind of research. It's beneficial, but it also takes your
attention away for a few hours per call, both with preparation, the call itself,
and making meaningful notes during and after the call. I recommend you
take a day for this activity with three or four customers every two months.
Try talking to the same customers multiple times throughout a year.
What new problems did they encounter since your last call? Did you solve
the problems they complained about in the meantime? This is a great
opportunity for you to show how accountable you can be. If you can make a
customer's life easier, it’s likely they will share their experience with their
peers.
CUSTOMER RETENTION: KEEPING THEM
AROUND
When it comes to customer relationships, momentum is on your side: it is
much easier to retain a customer than it is to find a new one. Once the initial
inertia is surpassed, the effort that needs to be put into keeping a customer
is significantly lower than acquiring and onboarding a new customer. And a
churned customer is a double loss: not only do you have to find a new
customer to replace them; to grow, you will need to find two new
customers. That’s why customer retention is of utmost importance when
growing a business.
This focus on retaining a customer at all costs is somewhat new. Before
the subscription economy, a repeat customer was a nice-to-have, but most
of the time, the relationship with the customer was over after the first
transaction. Processes were optimized to get the customer through the order
process and stop them from abandoning their cart. But once they ordered, it
was over.
The membership economy is very different. Customer retention is more
important than getting new customers, as churn is the silent killer. Retention
can be measured in renewal or cancellation rates, and keeping it as close to
100% as possible will determine if your business is sustainable or not.
Luckily, there are several proven strategies to increase retention, and
they all center around your relationship with your customers.
Value Nurturing
Value nurturing strategies increase the customer's perceived value of your
product, making the cancellation feel like a more significant loss. Showing
your customers how much they benefit from your product will make them
stick around longer.
Your goal is to confirm again, over and over, your customers' belief that
choosing your service was a smart choice. Not only does it have to feel
right, but it should also clearly be a good economic decision, both on their
first day and right now.
In an ideal world, customers would continuously notice what a fantastic
product you provide them. They would flood your customer service
channels with thank you messages, and they would write long blog posts
about how everyone should be a customer of your business, forever. Sadly,
life gets in the way, and other things are much more important to your
customers.
That's why it's up to you to show them what they get. Show them their
progress, how much they have improved ever since they used your service.
Show them how well they do compared to other users, how much impact
your service has in their lives. In short: make the value they receive visible
to them inside your product and in your communication.
It's not only limited to this, though. The goal is to retain a customer, and
showing them what they get is just one way of keeping them around. You
want your product to be something on which they depend. When times are
tough, you want your service to be the last one to be canceled. This is best
accomplished by creating voluntary dependency: offer something on which
your customers want to depend. Provide so much value compared to the
alternatives that they willingly take the risks inherent in every choice of
using an external product.
A word about value: we are not just talking about your revenue here.
For your customers to stick around, your business needs to provide them
with benefits and advantages every single time they use it. Your customer
lifetime value is inextricably linked to the perceived value of your
customers.
Here's the trick to customer success: increasing their revenue will
increase yours. Make them successful, help them grow the lifetime value of
their customers, and their LTV will expand as well.
Expectation Management
Managing expectations is a significant factor, too. Being able to
occasionally over-deliver will delight your customers as it is an unexpected
bonus. I'm not saying you should consistently undersell your product. But
surprising a customer with something good they didn't expect is a rare
occurrence in the business world. Those who succeed at that will be
remembered.
Customers will tell a few people about a positive experience, but they
will tell a few dozen about a negative one. Keeping customers above the
baseline will reduce the chance of them ranting to their peers, who may
often be potential customers.
Every impression counts. At any touchpoint, you can synchronize
expectations. Find out what your customers are concerned with and adjust
your priorities when expectations change. From your customer's
perspective, it's a magical thing to see a feature suggestion become an
actual feature.
The level of trust in the brand and the decisions you make are incredibly
important for renewal. By aligning what your customers expect you to do
with your actions, trust grows, and value generation will happen along with
the expectations of your customers.
Those expectations change over time. In the beginning, customers often
have to find their footing, and they expect ease of use and being able to
integrate your product into their workflow. After a few years, focus shifts to
perceived value, as your service has become a regular part of your
customers' work routine. Unless they're really needed, customers will ask
less and less for new features, and they will shift their focus onto existing
parts of your offer and how the current set of features can be improved even
more.
Throughout a customer's lifetime, get a feel for the acceptance of and
desire for self-service in your customer base. In the beginning, you can
respond to every support query yourself. When you scale, more of your
support will shift toward more asynchronous and self-help solutions. It's
important to take your customers with you on that journey. The early
adopter that you talked to every few days through your real-time chat will
have to understand that your attention is more divided. Their expectations
will need to change with your structural changes.
Find the At-Risk-of-Leaving Customers
In the best case, a customer stays with you for many years. They love your
product, their every wish comes true every time, and they become catalysts
for your marketing.
This is, of course, utopian. Every single customer of yours has different
problems and hardships, and what works for one may not work for another.
Inevitably, at some point, a few customers will think about canceling. If you
want your retention to remain high, there are two things you can do:
Convince them to stay if they’re about to leave. The hard part is to
figure out who is about to cancel. You can track people clicking the button
that starts the cancellation process and trigger a customer service
conversation. Tag this customer as someone who should receive a follow-up
email asking what you can do for them. You can track other things than
clear cancellation intent: do they stop using the product for a long time?
Stay clear of acting too quickly, as this is often a result of vacation,
maternal leave, or just other priorities. But it is worth measuring so that you
have an indicator you can use to inform your communication strategy.
Convince them to come back after they leave. This is your last chance
to retain them as a customer. After someone cancels, give them a grace
period of a few days or hours, but re-engage them. Depending on how
shameless you want to be, ask them to return with a free month, or even
extend them the offer of a lifetime discount for returning on a paid
subscription. As long as it fits into your economic calculations, keeping a
customer is worth more than losing them, even with reduced revenue.
There is a difference in what makes customers leave, and it is connected
to how long they have been with you. Early customers are more likely to
quit because of lower switching costs and less dependency on your service
within their established workflows. They're more jittery, so expect their
cohorts to cancel more. Long-term customers quit for different reasons:
either their perceived value decreases or the problem–solution fit of your
service is misaligned. Take your customer’s business size and age into
account when you craft your messaging for each cohort, and find something
that works for each of them.
Actionable Retention
Here are a few things we did at FeedbackPanda to keep customer retention
as high as possible.
Staying in touch with your customers will keep them engaged.
Offering a weekly newsletter to expose them to things that have happened
in their industry will do two things: first, it will associate your business with
a trusted source of information, and second, it will also show that you know
what you're talking about. Building trust and reputation goes a long way
toward retaining a customer.
Tighten and focus your onboarding. A customer who "gets it" quickly
after signing up will stay with you longer and think of your business as a
dependable service. If you can reduce the number of steps until your
prospective customer reaches the "a-ha" effect, go for it. There is nothing
better than a customer telling their peers that your service is "a no-brainer."
Do things that don't scale. Send a postcard. Delight your customers
with surprises on their birthdays. Send them a gift after they've been with
you for a year. Host a meetup in the city where most of them live. Surprise
them in ways that other businesses can't—and wouldn't. Not only will this
make those customers stick around, but word will travel, and you will
benefit from your customers sharing their delight and surprise with each
other. When we had our first 100 customers, we sent out postcards to all of
them. A lot of customers shared photos of receiving those postcards in the
mail, and consequently, a lot of prospects signed up for our service.
Ask your customers for testimonials. Use them on your marketing
site, in app-stores, or any other platform where they can share it with their
peers. This gives your reputation and your customer a feeling of being
appreciated; after all, they are asked about their opinion. At
FeedbackPanda, we often did this after intense customer service
interactions where we solved a customer's problem successfully. A happy
customer gives great reviews.
In every interaction, focus on building a respectful relationship with
your customer. It's the one currency that is worth more than the money they
pay you every month.
BUILDING A MATURE BUSINESS
CONTINUOUS VALIDATION: STAYING IN TOUCH
WITH YOUR MARKET
I first felt that we truly had a validated business when we had our very
first yearly subscriber. That level of commitment for a young product such
as FeedbackPanda two months into our existence showed us that people
wanted what we made and were ready to put their money on it.
However, validation is always a temporary state. Your business can be
validated only “for the time being.” Competition, a changing regulatory
landscape, human error, bad press, changing preferences can all derail a
working business. That’s why we always kept an ear on the pulse of our
community. We screened public forums and groups for complaints and new
developments.
In the SaaS world, we have Continuous Integration. I think we should
also have the concept of Continuous Validation. Regularly and frequently,
assess where you are in terms of still being in touch with the market. Are
you still solving their most painful problem? Did that change? Are there
new issues that you didn’t encounter before? That will keep you on your
toes—and keep your customers happy.
Continuous Validation of a Business
Continuous Validation is the practice of assuming that every product is an
iteration of trying to solve a shape-shifting problem.
Within that cycle, processes and goals need to be realigned from time to
time. If you’re continuously validating your business, you will avoid
making large pivots or becoming outdated.
Today, a business may need to solve a specific problem (let’s say
Selling Time Machines). Still, a few months or years later, it may need to
shift its core business and product strategy (let’s say to Grandfather-
Paradox-Resolution as a Service). Or maybe, a regulatory agency (let’s say
the Ministry of Time Travel and Tobacco) issues new guidelines and
requirements (let’s say “No Time Travel on Sundays“), to which the
business needs to adapt (let’s say by providing a Time Travel Permission
API and selling that as a plan upgrade).
What was once a flourishing business model can turn into an adjacent-
yet-different enterprise over time. How can you make sure that you’re still
aligned with the needs and requirements of your customers?
Check for Problem/Solution Alignment
Every few months, determine if your business is still solving the problem it
set out to solve.
Most products are engineered for particular use cases. Those use cases
could transform over time. Industries adopt new practices, and workflows
change. Your tool may be front and center right now, but a change to the
business process or a regulatory requirement may make your product less
effective.
Talk to your customers and see if they find friction where there was
none before:
Do they still deal with the problem frequently?
Does the product provide as much value as it used to a few months
ago?
Have they noticed that your product has become harder to use for
certain tasks? (This usually implies a change in the task, not
necessarily the product.)
Are there other tools that they use before and after using your
product to get to their results?
Check for “Eisenhower Alignment”
Every few months, determine if you are still solving the most significant
problem your customers have. Was something introduced that makes your
solution less important? Is their problem less urgent?
This check is named after the Eisenhower Matrix, a method designed to
shine a light on the tasks that need to be prioritized. It applies to any
audience and industry. People find it easy to use as it only asks if a task is
important, urgent, both, or neither. Regularly checking to see if the problem
you are solving still exhibits the qualities of a critical problem and fits the
Important/Urgent quadrant of the Eisenhower Matrix will allow you to
pivot to a different issue if that one is gaining more prevalence.
If you have a way to track how much value your product creates for
your customers (as a lead generation tool would track the number of leads
generated per day), make sure you look into the historical development of
that metric. Is it going up for most users or just a few? What’s the overall
trend? Find the outliers and talk to them to see what happened to impact
their usage of your product.
How to Check
With these two performance checks every once in a while, you are
continuously validating your business. But how can you get this
information?
It boils down to talking to your customers, either face-to-face or through
a survey. I would recommend direct conversations with a few select
customers instead of blasting everyone with surveys, but both methods have
their benefits. The important part is to reach out to customers who care
about their work, and talk to them about the problems they face and if
you’re still solving them adequately. Like in any good conversation with
customers, try to be a good listener. Don’t talk about the product, but ask
them about how they solve their problems.
If you have the opportunity to talk to the same people again and again
over a few years, take it. There is a lot to be learned from the changing
perspective of a customer. You will be able to see a difference in what is
important to them at different points during their professional journey,
which will provide insight into retention strategies along the way. This kind
of interaction will also turn your customers into advocates for your
business. Being taken seriously will create a solid bond between customer
and brand, and the benefits of those kinds of relationships cannot be
overstated.
If you create surveys, make sure you don’t limit your customers'
responses. You are not trying to find surprising, unexpected information. If
you already knew of a shift in their problem space, you would have already
reacted to it. While we are talking about validation, your primary goal is to
explore the unknown, detecting the unexpected changes that you have so far
missed. Give survey participants a lot of opportunities to write free-form
text, and ask open questions.
Continuous Validation: Check for Founder Alignment
Every few months, look inside yourself to see if you are still feeling
passionate about your vision. You set out to make the world a better place
for someone in a particular way. Do you still care about the same people? Is
there a subgroup or a new audience that you discovered that is even more
relatable? Is there another way of getting them to the goals that you have
found while solving their problems? Are you still excited about how you
help your customers? Have you been brooding over a new idea, but work
on your current business goals is keeping you from reflecting on it?
A running business requires commitment and weathering the storms of
day-to-day operations. If you’re feeling burned out or disinterested, think
about delegating the work that is the most tedious. You’re a founder; focus
on your vision whenever you can. That is the one thing you can’t delegate.
When you reflect on founder alignment, envision where you want to be
in a few years. From that perspective, take a look at your business. Is it a
vehicle that will get you there? Or is it a barrier on the path to where you
want to go? Adjust how you run your business accordingly.
Continuous Validation: How Much Is Too Much?
While it’s great to check your business every now and then, you should not
do that too often. Just like looking at the stock market every day will drive
any long-term investor crazy, you don’t benefit from continually brooding
over the validity of your business, particularly when you have paying
customers. Building relationships with the customers you have today is
more important than wondering if you will still have them a year from now.
The former enables the latter, while the latter hinders the former.
I recommend taking a day each quarter to reflect and go through the
validation checks outlined earlier. By validating the problem–solution fit,
answering the biggest-problem question by using the Eisenhower Matrix,
and checking your passion for how you work and for whom you want to
work, you will make sure that you continue to do meaningful, valuable, and
impactful work.
You May Not Be Validating Enough (or Correctly)
If you’ve built a company that is highly automated, you’re running the risk
of losing touch with your customers. At FeedbackPanda, we had a lot of
self-service help material, so many customers would not talk to us through
our customer service channels. We would make sure that the help-desk
system would contact them and if there was anything the system didn’t
solve for them, we would learn of what customers were searching for
unsuccessfully. Like that, the more complicated problems would eventually
be surfaced to us, the humans behind the operation.
You may not need to talk to people at all times, but make sure you talk
to them when you’re stepping through the validation tasks set out above.
Having a lot of metrics and KPIs is becoming more and more common.
Don’t just look at the numbers for your decision-making. Use those
numbers to see downward trends, but reach out to customers to confirm
your observations and get to your conclusions.
All in all, your best bet is to keep your communication channels open to
your customers. I’ve written about how to offer maximum customer service
with minimum effort. Try setting up synchronous, asynchronous, and self-
help systems that will allow you to reach out to your customers from time
to time.
Keep those channels open, and note when people suddenly start to
complain or point out things that are lacking when they were not before.
Your customers will make sure you continue to provide a product that they
need to solve their ever-changing problems.
Finally, there is a risk of validating only features and new developments
while leaving out the assumptions. This can be called second-order
validation: validate not only the choices you made but also the underlying
concepts. An example would be validating a newly introduced tabular view
of some data. The first-order question is “Does this tabular view display the
data in a meaningful way that helps our customers solve their problem?“
The second-order question would be “Is the problem that this data can help
solve still the relevant problem, or should we focus on showing different
data, potentially in a tabular view?“ It’s a version of the 5 Whys, applied to
customer needs and desires.
Try digging as deep as you can. You will accomplish the best degree of
validation by asking real customers about their real problems, figuring out
the reasons behind their actions, and making sure you have a clear
understanding what has the most impact on their lives.
ROADMAPS AND YOU: BUILDING A FUTURE
TOGETHER
It's great to know where you are going. It's even better to know that your
customers approve of that.
Both goals can be reached by establishing roadmaps. Usually, that's a
document that plans what you want to do in the future, ordered by when
you want to do it, with more or less accurate guesses on how long it will
take. When a feature prioritization framework is a compass, then a roadmap
is… well, a map.
The purpose of this roadmap is two-fold: to give you a clear plan for the
future, and to help your customer trust that your service will be useful to
them for a long time.
One Roadmap, Two Roadmaps
You will encounter founders who tell you that you should have an internal
roadmap and a different external roadmap so you can manage expectations.
You will also meet founders who tell you that, for transparency's sake, you
should only have one solitary roadmap.
This is a question of how much you want to communicate with your
customers, and it will heavily depend on the industry you're in, your
competition, and how much transparency you're going for.
I think that a workable solution is somewhere in the middle: have an
internal roadmap with all the details, and show a slightly redacted version to
the public. For the internal roadmap, use your best estimates and detailed
descriptions; for the external roadmap, use generalized date ranges and
fewer details. The customer-facing map should always be a limited view of
the original. That way, you retain control over what is visible, but it's never
too far from your internal roadmap.
Internal Roadmaps
For every single project I've worked on in the past, I eventually had a road
map. Sometimes it existed before I started working on the product; other
times, it was established months after the project already had paying
customers. It's one of many tools that help to structure and plan your work
in a dynamic and often-changing company.
You'll benefit from having a plan, even if you don't necessarily stick
with it all the time. After all, you're an agile bootstrapper, everything is
essentially an experiment, and no decision is set in stone, particularly not
the things you'll be doing a few years from now. So, treat it as a flexible
guideline.
Internal roadmaps should contain goals and dates for all sections of your
business: product milestones, sales and marketing goals, and your plans for
operative activities like building a team, integrations, and partnerships.
Don't limit a roadmap to features or releases; it can reflect the future of your
whole business. In fact, the more different sections of your business are
involved, the more insight you might glean into the connection between
things.
There are several formats for roadmaps, and they all have their pros and
cons:
Timeline roadmaps: These are great when you're one of those
founders who needs deadlines for motivation and peace of mind.
You can see which things need to be done in parallel at what time,
allowing you to know when and where to focus your attention. You
can easily miss those dates, though, so better use high-level terms
like "by April" instead of "April 21st."
Roadmaps without dates: I personally really like these, and it’s
best if they come in the form of a Gantt chart. Roadmaps like this
show dependencies and connections between tasks more than any
discrete date when they should be accomplished. "It's done when
it's done, and here is what needs to happen to get there"—what a
bootstrapped-compatible sentiment.
Kanban-style roadmaps: Unlike the more common timeline-
based roadmaps, Kanban-style roadmaps categorize your planned
activities and features into groups, like "Backlog," "To Do,"
"Doing," and "Done." This is a great way of sorting things if you
don't want to commit to any particular order but still want to keep
an outline of what the future holds.
No matter which style you choose, you will benefit from having a
document that outlines the steps you can and should take with your
business. You don't have to keep all the information in your head.
Public Roadmaps (and More)
There is another useful side of roadmaps: making them available to your
customers. Future revenue is much more likely to happen when those who
pay are happy to continue to do so. If you involve the people who use your
product in its development, you will be able to get immediate feedback
about the desirability of your planned features. The best way to do this is to
have a public feature roadmap (like the one offered by the Roadmap SaaS
Canny).
A benefit of a public product roadmap is that it could incentivize
customers to commit to yearly plans both as a sign of confidence in your
product and to lock in your commitment to provide it for at least a year.
While it's great to have those funds available, be aware that this also sets
expectations. If you don't deliver on your promise, there will be some
damage to the trustworthiness of your brand.
In addition to the roadmap, allowing your customers to suggest features
and vote on them is also an excellent idea to measure what people are
looking for (and which of those problems are commonly felt). It doesn't
absolve you of doing your own research though. The suggestions generated
through these tools should start your research process, not conclude it.
A warning about public roadmaps: they become a commitment once
you show them to your customers. Once you communicate intent,
customers see it as a promise. If you don't follow through, your public
roadmap is pointless. If you have dates on your public roadmap, customers
expect things to be finished by then. People are drawn to concrete figures,
and nothing is more concrete than a date.
Keep in mind that the public roadmap is completely optional. You are at
perfect liberty to tell people that your plans are your own, and you won't
share them. If you think that this may give your competitors too much
information, don't make it public. Just know that customers are used to not
being told what is going to happen, and your service could stand out as
being the one that does share its plans for the future.
BUILDING A SELLABLE BUSINESS
In his book Built to Sell, John Warrillow talks about how to set up a
company so it’s easy to sell. The great thing about structuring your business
like that is that even if you never sell it, you will be able to benefit from it.
The reason for this is that the Built-to-Sell method focuses on removing the
need for the founders to work in the company.
We took this approach with FeedbackPanda, and it literally paid off.
After running our business for about 18 months, we had grown it to a mid-
five-figure monthly revenue figure, and since we had been sharing this
revenue on our IndieHackers product page, the first potential acquirers
started reaching out to us.
At that point, we had a very sellable company but no intention to sell. It
was very apparent to us that we had a valuable business on our hands—after
all, we had done everything we could to make it sustainable. But after a few
emails, we were negotiating a deal with a prospective acquirer. Less than
two years after launching the business, we had sold it. Transitioning the
business was extremely painless, much more than we had thought it would
be because we had done everything right to make FeedbackPanda sellable.
What Makes a Business Sellable?
Every business that generates a profit is sellable. In fact, even the ones that
don't are sellable—to the right buyer. But the kind of "sellable" I am talking
about is not a fire-sale or a bargain-bin acquisition. When I say that a
business is sellable, I mean that it will allow you to elevate yourself into a
position of previously unattainable financial security and professional
success. It did for me, so I will share as much as I can of my experience and
learnings.
To sell your business for a life-changing amount of money, it will have
to be worth at least that much to potential acquirers. This value will always
be highly subjective, so take any numbers and figures you encounter with a
grain of salt: if the same business can have a significantly different value
between multiple acquirers, then it will be even more pronounced between
unrelated businesses from unconnected industries. And that's before taking
into account the economic environment.
However, one fact remains true no matter how you look at it: selling a
well-structured, sustainable business will always net you a premium.
Acquirers will always be interested in companies and products that are
doing well and were built with intent.
A Sellable Business Is Focused
When someone is interested in buying your company, they are looking into
how much revenue they can expect to receive and how much work it would
be to run it. If your business offers one specialized service to a clearly
defined niche audience, an acquirer only needs to be trained in one area of
expertise. If you provide six different products to a much more general
audience, running the company will be more complicated. It will mean
more resources, more training, and less profit.
A specialized business is a business built by experts. Your business will
have a reputational advantage, and it will be structured to be as efficient as
possible because of the expert insights that went into building it. To an
acquirer, it comes pre-optimized. For you, it means that your business is the
best version of itself: it's the sharpest blade you can forge.
The most attractive businesses have standardized offerings. Most
modern SaaS businesses already do that, as standardizing is the only means
to achieve economies of scale. For a buyer, "bespoke" is not an indicator of
quality; it's a source of trouble. By delivering the same service to all of your
customers, any improvement for a single customer will be an improvement
for all of them. That will net the business a premium when it is sold.
A Sellable Business Can Run without You
A business that can run without you is sellable. When you are still needed
for the day-to-day operations of your company, potential buyers will be
scared away. What if you won’t stay onboard? What if they can’t find
someone to replace you? That’s why you want to become replaceable, or
better yet, replace yourself while running the business already.
The idea is that once you make yourself completely replaceable, you
can either hire someone to do your work or hand over the business for a
hefty pile of money. Either way, you will be able to benefit from the
company without needing to work. This is best done by automating as much
of the work as possible and delegating the rest.
The trick is to structure the business for a successful acquisition from
the beginning. Both the formal shell of the business and the actual services
and offerings can be optimized to be made easy and lucrative to sell. The
more you automate the processes of your business, the less your acquirer
will have to train new employees. The more you document your processes,
the easier the training of the people who replace you will be.
High levels of automation and documentation also make your business
run much more smoothly while you own and operate it. Every automation is
one less task that you could make mistakes in. Every documented process is
a means to easily onboard an employee. The fewer tasks you have to do
yourself manually, the more you can spend your time working on things
that significantly improve your business, making it more valuable.
A Sellable Business Is Independent
If you have a lot of customers, you will distribute the risk of cancellations.
If you only have a few big clients, not only does a single client quitting take
a big chunk out of your revenue, it also puts you at the mercy of their
internal processes and politics. Don’t be dependent.
Acquirers will not buy a business that will implode if a particular
customer should cancel. If this risk is too high for a potential buyer, it
should be too high for you as well. Diversify your customers. Churn will
happen, for reasons that are beyond your control. What is in your control is
how you structure your business to deal with the consequences of that
situation.
A Sellable Business Does Not Have to Be Sold
This is the best part about making your business sellable: you don't have to
sell it to receive the benefits. You can just keep it for as long as you like,
and see its value grow. As long as you enjoy running your business, you can
ignore or defer the acquisition offers. Most buyers will want to buy your
business even more at a later point if you show that you could keep growing
it after they first contacted you. After all, you just validated their belief that
your business could be further expanded.
Before we founded FeedbackPanda, I spent a lot of time reading
startup-related books and listening to podcasts published by the founder
community. I was fortunate to learn from the book Built to Sell early on,
which gave us the opportunity to build FeedbackPanda as a sellable
business from the very start.
We probably would have focused on different things had we not been
aware of the future benefits of building a sellable business. Over time,
focusing on automation and documentation allowed us to keep running a
SaaS business with thousands of customers and a two-person team.
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES:
MANAGING YOUR FUTURE SELF
Delegation is most effective if there is an Operations Manual for the
company. Michael E. Gerber calls this the "Turnkey Revolution" in his
book The E-Myth Revisited: the idea of documenting your business like a
franchise. Build your business in a way that you could hand it over to
someone else, and it would still keep running.
That's where documentation comes in, in the form of Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs). This sounds like a very bureaucratic
construct, but it can be as flexible as you want it to be. After all, it's your
business, and your processes will be structured in any way you prefer.
What Are SOPs and Why Are They Useful?
Standard Operating Procedures describe every activity that needs to be done
in great detail. They do so in a—surprise—standardized way so that you
can easily hand them over to someone else without needing additional
information.
By documenting all kinds of processes in your business, you're
effectively writing a handbook. This handbook will be worth its virtual
weight in gold when you sell your business eventually, and it's already
highly valuable while you're still running your business. No matter if it's
your replacement, an employee, or yourself, following SOPs will allow you
to work
More reliably: Any well-documented process can be executed
with fewer errors. After all, you have nothing to remember if all
the steps involved are in front of you in a bullet-point list with
screenshots and warning labels. SOPs include crucial information
to contextualize the process, so even if an employee performs a
task for the first time, they know the why and the how.
Faster: Any well-documented process can be executed more
quickly, as there is no confusion as to what will need to happen
next. It's all there, in black and white.
More effectively: Any process that's well-documented can be
executed more efficiently, both at the moment it's performed and
over time. Any Standard Operating Procedure can evolve over
time, and when a central process receives improvements, any
future implementation will benefit from the changes. It's built-in
quality control.
Remember that one time a customer asked you to send them their
invoice because they couldn't download it from your application for some
reason? Imagine, instead of just doing it, you'd written it down. Imagine
you'd taken screenshots of every step, creating a clear recipe for getting
from the customer reaching out to the moment when you can tell them to
check their email.
Repeat this for all positions in your company, and you will end up with
a long list of Standard Operating Procedures that you can hand to any new
hire and expect them to be able to produce results quickly. That first
customer-service-employee-onboarding journey just turned from an
odyssey into a pleasure cruise.
Operating procedures de-risk the business as they take actions that have
proven results and describe how to do them correctly. Potential harmful
side-effects or mistakes are mentioned in SOPs, so as to raise awareness of
why things are done the way they are done.
Standard Operating Procedure Building Blocks
Documenting your processes starts with the right tool. That can be as
simple as a Word Document or a collaborative Google Doc, something
intermediary like an Evernote project or a Notion workspace, or a specific
tool for SOPs like SweetProcess or Trainual, which are focused on
providing a collaborative business handbook solution.
I recommend you start out with a collaborative Google Doc until you
have found a format that works for you and then transfer it to a more
elaborate solution should you ever need it.
Look at the processes you already have in place but not yet documented.
Figure out which format would work best for them. Are step-by-step
checklists workable? Would flowcharts work better? Written full-length
instructions? Find something that works for you, as you'll be the first and
frankly most important person to work with these in the future.
Do a trial run and try to document one particular process using multiple
formats. Pick something that is representative of the majority of your
processes for this exercise. Once you have created an SOP in a few different
styles, you will know which one appeals to you most. Stick with that one
for the kinds of processes that are compatible. Over the long term, keeping
your documentation in a unified style will make your procedures even faster
and more efficient.
If you're already privileged enough to have employees, get them on
board. Show them the formats and your examples. They will be the ones
working with those procedures most, so their input is indispensable at this
point.
When you write an SOP, put yourself into the shoes of someone else
doing the job. This fictional person just joined your business and is eager to
work for you. What would they need to know to make this a positive and
productive experience? What can you give them in terms of context and
guidance that would allow them to solve this problem without your help the
first time they encounter it?
When in doubt, be detailed. When it comes to SOPs, there can’t be "Too
Much Information." Your employees can skip reading things they already
know, but they can't divine what you may or may not have meant if it's not
there.
Implementing Standard Operating Procedures
Writing documentation is one thing, but getting yourself and your
employees to follow the procedures is a whole other thing. It's a balancing
act between allowing for creativity and having people performing the tasks
as they are defined.
Although the point of having Standard Operating Procedures is to
codify processes into clearly defined steps, as a bootstrapper, you can have
exceptions here and there. Thinking out of the box is what got you here, so
keep it going, even when you're dealing with documentation.
Updating Standard Operating Procedures
Just like your business is a changing entity, so is your documentation of its
processes. At least once a year, but best every few months, do a quick read-
through and see if anything stands out as a procedure in need of updating.
Often, you will notice that a procedure needs to be updated right when
you're performing the task it describes. I recommend deferring this work a
few hours to avoid heat-of-the-moment changes that lack reflection. At the
same time, you should update it soon after doing the task, or else the
perceived need and urgency are lost, and what remains is a procedure that
could have been improved but was not.
The Side-Effects of Standard Operating Procedures
Some SOPs will also be appealing starting points for automation. If you do
a task a few times a week and it takes you an hour each time, spending a
few days on building automation for it is worth it if you know you'll have to
do it for another year.
Searching your SOPs for automation opportunities regularly is a great
way of making the company leaner and less dependent on reminders and
tedious labor. Good documentation and automation go hand in hand in
making a business sellable. If one informs the other, that's even better.
A set of good SOPs is great to hand over to new hires. But it will also
help you speed up the tasks that you repeatedly have to do yourself. By
following a prepared checklist that is the same every time you work on a
task, you accelerate the non-automatable functions, giving you more time to
work on the creative parts of your business.
BUILDING A MATURE PRODUCT
With a business that is getting more and more organized, your product will
also need to be improved in the Stability Stage. You have proven that you
can build a solution to deal with a critical problem. Now is the time to allow
more and more people to work with this product.
As you scale your customer base, you may want to look into providing
new and interoperable ways of interacting with your product. An extensible
product increases the opportunity surface for it to become an important part
of your customers' workflows by integrating into other solutions and being
integrable itself.
It's quite likely that at this stage, your product is mostly complete. It
may even have a few features that made sense at the time but are now lying
around unused, cluttering the interface and your codebase. While removing
features could go against most conventional product management advice,
it's worth considering. After all, it may make your product better: it would
be faster, easier to use, and more maintainable.
MADE TO STICK: SHAPING AN EXTENSIBLE
PRODUCT
It won’t take long before customers start asking for one particular kind
of feature: integrating into other tools that they use all the time. They have
adopted your product into their routine and their workflow, only to notice
that something is missing. Some steps need to be taken to get your product
to seamlessly join into the range of other tools your customers use to solve
their problems.
You are looking for product–workflow fit. While it’s great to be able to
use your product as a standalone solution to their problem, your customers
will value it much higher if it comes with two kinds of integrations: input
integration and output integration. To provide a basic level of both, build
your product to accept and return data in commonly used data formats (such
as the eternally requested CSV format). If the workflow requires
interactions with cloud services, you will find that most of them provide
easily used and well-documented APIs.
Input Integrations
Find out the shape of your customers’ data at the outset of their problem.
Let's say your audience is plumbers who need help requisitioning new
inventory of their pipefitting supplies. Do they already have an inventory
management system that has an API? Are they maybe using an Excel sheet
or a Google spreadsheet? Do they have such a system at all, or do they "go
and check" regularly?
Whatever it is, you will need to allow your customers to use the system
they already have in place. Forcing them to adopt another system just
because your product only works with that is a surefire way to build a tool
that your prospective customers won't even try.
Every kind of additional input format you support will open your
product to more potential customers. This requires research and expert
knowledge of the field you're operating in. Of course, at some point, the
fraction of customers will be tiny, a niche within the niche, and their
potential revenue will be lower than what it costs you to build and maintain
an integration. That, too, requires insight into your market.
Whenever you work with data imports, here are a few basic ideas:
Integrate the industry-standard format. Many industries have
developed common interchange data formats over time, and they
usually are specified in great detail. This is an easy choice if you
want to support the biggest number of customers.
Integrate comma-separated values. This is the lingua franca of
data. Almost every software tool eventually understands and
produces comma-separated values, the CSV format.
Integrate Excel files and Google sheets. Often, that's the highest
stage that your prospects will reach with their self-invented and
self-organized systems. These are the systems you intend to
replace, so make it easy to migrate the existing data into your
product.
Integrate JSON and/or XML. When there are already existing
services and APIs in your space, make your product compatible
with their outputs. Remember, your product exists in a landscape
of other services, and fitting into your customers' workflow is the
way to adoption.
Output Integration
What is true for your customers' workflow before they use your product is
also true for when you've solved their critical problem successfully: they
need to continue with other steps. Allowing their data to be easily utilized
right after using your service will significantly increase your customer
retention and turn your product from a nice-to-have into a must-have.
When you look into which data formats your customers expect, look
into both the immediate steps that follow and the final outcome of your
customers' task. If you can supply data in a shape that allows for both to be
maximally valuable, you're helping twice. If you can enrich your customers'
data with something they can use later down the road, your product delivers
value even when they're done using it.
When you're exploring what shape your result data should have, here
are a few thoughts:
Produce the industry-standard format. As with the input data,
this will give you access to the largest group of prospective
customers. It will also make sure that other tools that eventually
integrate with your solution implement this format, further
normalizing the industry standard.
Allow for CSV data export. Your customers may not need it all
the time, but this data format is surprisingly relevant for retention.
It's commonly used when your customers want to experiment with
what using your data with another tool would be like. If you allow
them to do this easily, it can further consolidate your product as an
essential part of completing tasks.
Produce machine-readable data like JSON. A service that can
be accessed by humans and machines is twice as valuable as one
that can only be used by people. Allow your more technical
customers to use your product in a programmatical way, and the
impact of your solution will increase significantly. After all, the
types of solutions that other businesses can create by integrating
your service as one of many are thousand-fold and extraordinary!
Facilitate reporting. Whatever problem your service solves, it's
likely that someone has to report what they have been doing and
how well they've done it. For that, make it easy for your customers
to export their transactional data, like how often and how much
they have used your service. This is also a selling point when
you're trying to convince managers and team leads to purchase
your product. That way, the problem solves your customers' critical
problems as well as allowing their managers to measure their
performance—a win-win-win situation.
Integrating Beyond Data Formats
Input and output integrations cover the basic data workflow that your
customers have. For deeper integrations, you can build extensions that
integrate other SaaS or standalone software products that make up parts of
the daily operations of your customers.
Many SaaS products can be integrated programmatically, usually using
OAuth or API-key-based credentials. Either way, they can provide a
number of interesting opportunities. The most basic integrations enable you
to access some subset of your customers' data stored on another SaaS
service, either temporarily or until the access is revoked. More advanced
integrations will make things like data synchronization, manipulation, and
reporting a highly automatable and time-saving endeavor—all of which are
highly valued as additional side-effects of a tool that solves your customers'
critical problem.
Think about how you can enable other businesses to integrate with your
product as well. How would offering a programmatic interface enable other
services to provide additional benefits to their customers? How could a
service at another part of your customers' workflow benefit from a direct
integration? Could that remove superfluous steps like data conversion or
export/import? If you can provide a means for developers to integrate your
product into theirs, you amplify the reach into your audience by
overlapping it with theirs.
On the user-experience side of your customers, consider supplying
browser extensions. Often, a little button or link placed into another website
can make all the difference. This was the first integration we built at
FeedbackPanda. We added a little panda face, already our logo at the time,
into the online classrooms by having our customers install a Chrome
browser extension. Clicking that button would open a new tab, transmit a
bit of information about the classroom to an endpoint on our site, and our
frontend would automatically import that information into a form. This was
very simple, but it saved our customers a few dozen clicks and a few
seconds of typing every time they needed to create a new record. It wasn't
very hard to convince people that this was valuable: a 10-second video was
all we needed.
Browser extensions are easy to create and deploy, as browser vendors
have established browser extension stores that allow for automatic
deployments and updates. Building an extension is straightforward, as there
is a lot of good documentation available.
A word of warning about browser integrations into third-party websites
and services. At FeedbackPanda, we integrated into a lot of online schools'
web portals. Those businesses changed their products a lot and without
notifying anyone in advance. Since we never partnered with them, there
was no way for us to ever learn about this before it happened. Any changes
to the data that our extension needed to work would break it, and we would
have to release a fixed version. Consequentially, we had to implement
continuous automated tests and alarm systems that would tell us
immediately when such a change happened so that we could react quickly.
As the browser extension stores can take a few hours to distribute an
updated version, being quick to deploy a fix is essential to have as few
customers as possible impacted by such issues.
If the browser environment has certain limitations that prevent you from
fully solving your customers' problems (such as blocking notifications or
native filesystem access), you can build and offer dedicated desktop or
mobile applications. Only do this if it's required to use your product
efficiently. Building, maintaining, and deploying installable applications is
a herculean effort compared to a SaaS product. All of a sudden, you have
three different codebases and have to support different versions of different
operating systems, all with their own update schedules and idiosyncrasies.
If you can, restrict your product to a SaaS solution as long as you don't have
the resources to build a standalone application.
To make your product easier to integrate with other programs, provide a
machine-accessible interface such as a REST API or any other way to
automatically ingest data, using a commonly used and trusted
authentication method. This also allows you to monetize your product at
scale: by offering pricing based on API usage, you can create new
subscription tiers that are much more interesting to your more technical
users.
The Risks of Integrations
There is a risk of relying too much on these kinds of integrations, which is
platform dependence. If integrating with another tool is the only way your
product is usable, then any change to that product will be something you
have to deal with immediately. If they adjust their product, you will need to
make sure your product still integrates. If their business fails, all the
customers you gained through that integration may not need your product
anymore.
Whenever possible, aim to integrate with multiple competing solutions.
Do you integrate with MailChimp? Offer integrations into EmailOctopus,
GetResponse, and ConvertKit as well. Should one of these providers go
away, you can even help your users migrate to another one that you support.
Be very conscious that whenever you integrate into a service or another
service integrates into your product, both services become a slightly more
interesting target for a cyberattack. There is value in customer information,
both the personally identifiable information of your customers and the
business data they keep with you. Be extremely cautious of making any
such information easily retrievable through automated means. Always
imagine the worst way an integration could be exploited, and protect your
customers and their data with a level of attention that borders on paranoia.
Make sure you're legally allowed to integrate with the services and sites
you choose. Although web-scraping content has been declared legal in
many jurisdictions, not every business appreciates automated integrations
into their products or data. Be ready to ask for permission and study the
Terms & Conditions of the service with which you interface.
When you allow for integrations into your service, keep a close eye on
the performance impact they have on your infrastructure. While you have
complete control over your own software, the interactions caused by third-
party products cannot be easily influenced. If a service is hammering your
backend with hundreds of thousands of requests per second due to a
misconfiguration, you need to be able to maintain a stable system. Be
prepared to cut off access to your service for specific consumers, and build
a resilient infrastructure that can deal with heavy spikes of traffic. You don't
know how easily the delicate interconnectivity of services can be upset by a
simple programming error somewhere in one of the systems.
In short, think of the institutional risks of integrating with other
services. It's perfectly fine not to integrate with a service if you fear that it
could cost you dearly in the future. Integrations are supposed to amplify the
usefulness of your product, not bury a time-bomb beneath the foundations
of your business.
Made to Stick: Fostering Extensibility
There are a few ways to make a product that sticks around. You can make it
an integral part of a vital workflow, or you can make it so compelling that
people will change their workflows to fit the product. A way to do both of
them at the same time is to create an extensible product.
There are two main ways of extending your product: extending the
interface or extending the service itself.
Interface extensions will allow your users to create, use, and manage
widgets that integrate into your service and will enable them to do specific,
non-generalizable tasks directly in your product. An example of this would
be a widget that displays industry-specific time-series graphs drawn from
your data.
Service extensions will allow your users to integrate plugins that enable
them to use specific, non-generalizable functionality to manipulate the data
that your product uses. An example of this would be a plugin that would
pull in weather data from a public API into your supply chain management
service.
If you understand your product to be a source and a target for
integrations from the start, opportunities for extensibility will appear all
over the place. Take the ones with the highest impact on most users and
implement them first. In some cases, you can enter partnerships with the
companies that sell the service with which you integrate. This allows for
cross-marketing and mutual value add.
THE POWER OF OMISSION: KILLING FEATURES
FOR FUN AND PROFIT
If you add features to your product indiscriminately, you will end up with
a gigantic bloated mess of software. One way to deal with this is to be very
careful when deciding if new features should be added. Another rarely used
approach is to remove unused and outdated features. Removing the cruft
from your SaaS product is akin to pruning a hedge: you will end up with a
more recognizable shape and a clearer vision of what your product is all
about.
How Customers React When You Remove Features
Here’s the thing with change: there will always be people who hate it, with
or without reason. While notorious complainers can be safely ignored, pay
close attention to people who react negatively to product removal. Your
target customers should be the ones that you delight with your product, and
you never know how people use your product in weird ways until you break
a workflow that you never expected to be possible. You want to remove a
file upload button because everyone drags their files into the browser?
There will be that one user who uses their keyboard only. Removing the
feature makes the whole product unusable to them all of a sudden.
Make sure never to remove accessibility features because you don’t see
the need for them yourself. Impaired users rely on these things to be able to
use your product. Build as much accessibility as possible into the product
from the beginning.
When to Remove a Feature
In some way or another, every reason to remove a feature from your
product boils down to feature creep. Here are a few examples, both with
reasons why they should be removed and how they come to happen.
Remove unused features. When customers stop using features, they
either found a better solution to their problem or they have a different
problem to solve. As a result, unused features clutter the user interface of
your product, not providing any value to your users. At best, they are a
visual nuisance; at worst, they produce unintended side-effects, confusing
your customers by their presence. Your codebase will also show signs of
bloat when unused features stick around for too long.
We removed such a feature at FeedbackPanda. It was initially
introduced to allow our customers to migrate and amend their data from one
product version to another. As some of our customers were rather slow to
adopt the new version, we left the interface component in for a long time
and forgot about it. Half a year after the last customer finished migrating,
we finally removed the feature. While doing that, we figured out that some
of our customers had misused that feature to change their data in weird
ways that we didn't understand before. Talk about a side-effect!
Remove features that distract from product focus. Sometimes, you
build things because you think your customers need them, but they turn out
to be misaligned with your purpose of solving your customers' critical
problem. Those features can make other features less effective or at least
harder to find and use. This is the ultimate incarnation of feature creep. It's
what will turn your product into a tangled mess if you don't regularly trim
the fat.
Remove features that make the product too complex. Very similar to
features that distract your users are features that overwhelm them. Many
products have seen their customers churn because they became hopelessly
complicated to use. It all starts with the intent to provide more value, but it
eventually turns into feature overload.
Remove features that are expensive to maintain. This removal
opportunity is often overlooked. Some things that are part of your product
may, at some point, cause performance issues or incur higher monetary
costs than you're willing to pay. Often, it's easy to engineer and maintain
heavy-duty features at the beginning of a business with only a few
customers. Examples of this would be heavy background-processing of
customer data, complicated imports, or extensive export scenarios. While
limiting access to this feature may work, removing it is also an option if it's
do-or-die.
Why Does Feature Creep Happen?
Feature creep happens for many reasons, and all come from a genuine belief
that, at the moment when you conceptualize and build the feature, it's useful
and providing value to your business and your customers. But, of course,
just because you believe so doesn't make it real. I have built many features
that I felt to be absolutely necessary only to shamefully admit defeat and
remove them a few months after launching them.
Here are a few situations where I should not have added a feature but
did anyway:
I just wanted to build it. Sometimes, you're only interested in
understanding how things work, and you think you need to build it. I did so
with the FeedbackPanda invoicing system. What started as a simple part of
the application, not much more than a list, ended up being a PDF-
generating monster and tax-calculating monster of a feature. In retrospect,
that's a rabbit hole I should have never even looked at from a distance.
I just wanted to get and convert a big customer. In a prior startup, I
built several features for a prospective customer who promised to sign up if
only those features were implemented. Of course, they never signed up
even when I had deployed the changes, but we kept the feature in the
application because we hoped that other customers could benefit from it
somehow. They never did.
I thought it was the one feature I needed to release for things to
start happening. This is an example of the classical "Next Feature
Fallacy": the thinking that the next thing you do will have the big impact
you're waiting for. But it usually doesn't. Usually, it will be yet another
attempt at making a big difference and failing. This is a great opportunity to
dust yourself off and try again. Just make sure you remove the feature that
has proven not to work. Don't keep it hanging around.
There are a number of other reasons that can cause you to build things
you shouldn't have:
"Premature Optimization"-like integrations. You thought you
could use this eventually, and you'd better already have it in the
product before you need it. Maybe you intend to eventually partner
with a service, so you build an integration ahead of time. And then
the partnership falls through, and you never need it. Many
technical founders then fall prone to the sunk cost fallacy, thinking
that since they already invested their time, the functionality needs
to stay there.
You're trying to capitalize on trends. Ever implemented social-
media-like functionality even if your customers never interact? I
built a Facebook-like social stream with messages and comments
for farmers who never took the time to use it because they were too
busy harvesting their vegetables. But social media feeds were
everywhere, so we just had to have something like this, too. It was
not required at all, and completely unused, but we believed that we
could pull it off.
You saw it somewhere else, and it looked rather cool. Founders
get inspired by other software all the time, and then build
something very similar in their own products. What they forget is
that every feature exists within the context of a product. That cool
overlay animation you see on a social network for designers will
completely confuse your almost technically illiterate users. Try to
avoid things that are not essential to your product.
You needed to release something, and it was quick to build.
Sometimes, you feel like you just need to do something. You
haven't released a new feature in weeks, and customers have
always asked for something simple. It's not on your roadmap, and
you didn't put it on there because it wasn't essential, but you know
it will only take an hour or two. Now you have wasted your time
twice. You didn't work on anything meaningful, and you will have
to remove it again in the future.
No matter what your reasons were then, you need a slim and efficient
product now. So, trim the fat, and start removing those obsolete features.
Removing a Feature the Empathetic Way
If you want to remove a feature, sunset it. Make a public announcement
about the removal close to when people who use the feature would read it.
Then, turn it into an optional feature, using a configuration toggle. Change
that toggle to default to an "off" state, and measure how many people react
to it. Inform them how to re-enable it and how to work with your product
without that feature. If you feel confident that removing the feature won't
impact a significant amount of your target customers, remove it.
Feature removal has multiple impacts: you can fully remove a feature,
slowly wean customers off over a number of weeks, or phase out the feature
via options until the last customer has stopped using it.
No matter what speed you choose, the most important thing to
remember is to communicate the changes to your users before and after you
remove anything. This will reduce friction between you and your
customers. It prepares them for an impending change and reduces the
likelihood of them getting confused when it finally happens. By keeping
your customers in the loop, you're reducing the customer service load you'll
have when you remove the feature. Also, once they know about the change,
they can look for alternative ways to solve their problem if they were users
of the feature before.
Use all the instruments at your disposal to communicate the removal to
your customers. Tell them in-app and through an email. You never know
where they are right now, and you need them to know both in advance
through a thoughtful email and right when they are in the product, best in
the location where the feature used to be. Update your knowledge base and
prepare a transitionary video that clearly shows how to solve the problem
alternatively if ever needed. The more you invest in communicating a
feature removal, the less work you'll have on the customer service front.
There Will Be Consequences
Sometimes, you will learn that some features are part of very hard-to-
change workflows for some of your users. Removing the feature will cause
you to lose the customer in these cases. Sometimes, that is okay if the
removal reduces complexity for everyone else. It's a balancing act. Be clear
in your messaging, and insist on making the product a distinctive, slim,
focused version of itself instead of succumbing to featuritis.
If people ask why you removed a feature they used before, give them
good reasons. Customers will understand when you say, "less is more, and
this is making the product better." For your customers, the overall
usefulness of your product will trump individual features when they have a
chance to think about it. They may complain, but unless they cancel their
subscription, they will see it as a viable move.
Finally, by talking to customers before you remove a feature, you spread
out the haters. The complainers will complain over a few days, sometimes
to you, sometimes on social media, but their cries and yells will be sparse
and manageable. Much better than when all hell breaks loose at the same
time when you remove a feature without telling anyone.
All in all, slimming down your product can have a net positive effect on the
business, your customers, and the value they receive. Keep this tool handy
when you're doing some business introspection. Not all questions have to be
answered with a "What if we build this?"—some deserve a "We don't really
need this!"
BUILDING A TEAM
As the business grows, so will your responsibilities. More and more
customers will reach out with questions, and more and more bugs need to
be squashed and features designed.
What once filled an hour or two can quickly turn into an entire day. It
happens gradually, and you may miss the point when it turns from
additional work into a source of stress. What was easy to handle in the
beginning could turn into a destructive and insurmountable task later in the
course of your business.
If you want to stay sane and still have a balanced life, you will need
help. While some outliers can run their million-dollar businesses alone, you
will likely need a few people to take care of some things for you eventually.
I waited far too long to hire at FeedbackPanda, and it impacted me more
than the business. Think of hiring as an opportunity to accelerate the growth
of your business, at any level.
WHEN YOU REACH YOUR LIMITS: GROWING A
COMPANY BEYOND THE FOUNDER(S)
If you’re coming from a professional background in salaried positions, the
chances are that you’ve never hired anyone before. And even if you have,
hiring someone for your own business will be a daunting task.
It certainly was for me. I thought that I could manage all that work by
myself just fine, so why bother hiring. But I limited myself by doing things
that kept me from doing more meaningful work. I was spreading myself too
thin, trying to multitask when each task would have deserved my full
attention.
Sure, it’s great to help customers through live chat. But should I not
have spent the time fixing the very issues they complained about? Could
someone else not have a friendly conversation and show them a link to the
article in the knowledge base where all the steps were laid out? Most
importantly, did it really need to be me?
The Mistakes I Made When I Thought I Didn't Need to Hire
My first mistake was to think that it would only be reasonable to hire when
there would be enough work for a full-time position. To this day, I don't
know why I didn't think of hiring someone part-time, but to me, a job was a
full-time endeavor. This resulted in a strange scenario: I never felt it would
be enough work for a hire, because not only could I do it myself, but I
would also fit other things into my workday. The fact that I worked 12
hours or more every day of the week seemed to not have registered in my
entrepreneurial brain.
Hiring someone could have saved me countless hours of work every
day, freeing my mind from focusing on the mundane parts of the business at
all times. Sometimes, in between customer service chats, I would get a
glimpse of what that life could be. I just shrugged it off, but I should have
acted on that initial feeling and hired someone to help me.
My second mistake was to think that onboarding a new hire would be
too much work. It turned out that waiting to onboard a new hire is even
more work, as it just adds all the tasks you don't get to delegate on top of
the onboarding efforts. I completely misjudged how effective other people
can be at learning a new task. I also underestimated the impact of being
well-prepared by having built a sellable business.
If you're using Standard Operating Procedures in your business, the
effort of onboarding will be rather low, as you can just give the new
employee access to the relevant processes and documentation. Provided that
you created meaningful, exhaustive, and instructive documentation, your
new hire can explore the scope of their job and prepare for what is to come.
How and Whom to Hire
You always hear that you should hire slowly. That’s true; you don’t want to
waste resources when you could do it yourself or build automation to take
care of it. But once you see that you’re stuck doing work you don’t enjoy
that others could do for you, hire quickly.
Choosing what position to hire for will be a very subjective decision.
After all, your preferences and tolerance for doing certain jobs are uniquely
yours. Only you know when enough is enough.
In most SaaS businesses, customer service positions will be the first
ones for which you may want to hire. While software can scale indefinitely,
you can’t. Once your customer base grows, you can automate as much as
possible, but there will still be unforeseen problems at random points in
time. Finding someone to triage these issues and sending only the most
important ones through to you will free up significant space on your
calendar and in your mind.
Marketing and sales positions can also be hired for quite early. For all
three roles, you, as a founder, must instill the voice and tone of the
messaging into your early employees. Until now, you have always been
yourself, speaking to the customers the way you speak. It’s essential to keep
this style consistent.
Hire someone for the work that annoys you most. Repeat until you
enjoy all the work you do.
How to Find Your Perfect Hire
There are two places that I recommend checking out before you head over
to the regular job portals and recruiting agencies: expert communities and
within your customer base. I've found both to yield excellent results in
multiple startups I've been with.
Expert communities work extremely well for finding developers,
designers, and marketers. As a bootstrapped founder, you are at least
partially a developer, designer, and marketer. During your entrepreneurial
journey, you will have encountered the communities where other
professionals hang out. You will likely even have asked a few questions or
chatted with other founders. When you are looking into hiring someone, go
into the communities that you found most inviting, and offer the job there
first. You'll pre-filter your applicants that way, and have a much higher
chance of finding someone who will fit your culture.
Your customers can be a hunting ground for potential employees as
well. Particularly for marketing and customer service positions, there are a
lot of opportunities when searching for candidates among your customers.
No one knows more about the struggles and needs of your customers than
your customers themselves. That makes them ideal candidates to take over
the jobs that involve talking to prospective or existing patrons of your
business. They speak their language, and they know their pain even more
than you. They are destined to build bridges and foster relationships with
people they innately understand.
I had great success with both kinds of communities both within
FeedbackPanda and at a previous startup. Hiring customer service experts
from within our customer base was particularly effective in both cases. If
you find a person who is looking for something new and is already aware of
your company, all it takes is for them to have a background in the field. As
people change jobs every few years, it's not uncommon to find a marketing
expert who has become a teacher or a customer service professional who
also is interested in local food logistics. You don't know what talent
slumbers among your customers until you ask.
It will always be hard to convince people to join a small business. You'll
need to have a good pitch ready, as you will need to convey your vision of
the business and the part that your new employee will play. You'll need to
make clear how they can grow professionally in their new position. This
may be a hard thing to verbalize, particularly when you're looking for
someone to take over tasks that you find tedious. But don't worry, people
love all kinds of work. That's why we have accountants who actually enjoy
their jobs. And after all, that's what you want for your business: everyone
should love all the work they're doing. That's why you're hiring. You're
giving people who crave certain tasks a chance to do them for you, for your
business, and ultimately for their own enjoyment and livelihood.
BUILDING A BRAND
With a growing business comes growing awareness. The more people know
about your product, the more they will talk to their peers, increase your
reach, and help you recruit new customers. To benefit from that, you will
need to create a brand around your product and business: you need to have
a compelling story, ready to be shared by an engaged and passionate
audience.
You will need to start selling more than just a service at this point. Once
you start partnerships with other businesses and reach out into a less eager
segment of your market (than the early adopters you were talking to
before), your messaging moves from providing problem-solving
functionality toward creating superior value and helping customers reach
their goals.
But what do you say, and how do you spread the word? A well-
positioned brand with a unified voice takes care of the what, and a tribe will
take care of the how.
YOU WANT A TRIBE
According to Seth Godin, a tribe is a group of people that are connected
to each other, an idea, and a leader. Tribes are supercharged communities.
They are dense networks of people who bond over specific interests or
goals. These interests range from the mundane to the most personal and
exciting topics. No matter if you're into a certain line of shampoos, love
drag racing, or want to help the homeless, there will be a tribe of people
dedicated to that activity somewhere.
What makes them so special? What makes tribes so incredibly attractive
for bootstrapped businesses? To flourish, a tribe really only needs the means
to communicate and a shared interest. Tribes leverage social media and
networks to find a platform and allow their members to provide insights and
distribute knowledge specific to their shared interests among the
community.
Tribes and You
There are two ways of participating in a tribe. As a member of any tribe,
you can be a follower or a leader. Both roles allow you to be involved and
benefit from the interconnected nature of tribes in different ways.
To build a tribe around your business, you can step up as a leader,
enabling your customers and those who could become customers to connect
with each other, while centering it around your product. But even as a
follower of the thought leaders inside a tribe, you will benefit from the
knowledge and expertise you'll accumulate. You will learn how people tick,
what metaphorical language they speak, and what their needs and desires
are. No matter if you lead or follow, being part of a tribe will give you
valuable insights.
People have an innate need for connection on every level of their lives.
As a business, you can tap into a few of those, but be careful never to
exploit them. There is no faster way of losing your customers' trust than to
surprise them with actions that conflict with their understanding of
belonging and connection. Don't go for the quick win. People are extremely
sensitive to interactions where they are at risk of being exploited. Even a
harmless remark can cause them to be at high alert, and it will be
impossible to make a case for whatever you're selling if your prospect is
skeptical of your honesty and reliability. Let people find your service; don't
force it on them. Leave traces by providing valuable content; don't throw
yourself at your niche audience with discounts and savings.
Tribal Network Effects
The network effects in tribal communities are powerful, as people share a
large number of commonalities. When you reach out with a question, you
can be sure that you will receive an avalanche of responses. They may be
very different, as a tribe is not homogenous. But they will all be aimed at
accomplishing a shared desire, a common goal. Setting that goal is the job
of a leader. Transforming the shared interests of your tribe's members into a
common goal that your product can help accomplish is why marketing
works so well in tribes.
A tribe is a grapevine. You will hear about little things quickly, as they
cause ripples, which spread quickly through an engaged community. At
FeedbackPanda, the teacher tribe would often relay rumors and insider
information from within their employers' internal workgroups and forums.
That often allowed us to anticipate changes long before they were
implemented. Often, we had weeks to build features and fixes to cope with
new Chinese educational legislation that affected the schools where our
teachers taught. We often had implemented and deployed our solution
before the schools were done with their implementations, even though they
typically had hundreds of developers.
The speed with which information travels in tribes served us well when
our product experienced problems, either due to performance issues on our
end or when our integrations broke. First, any sign of trouble resulted in a
noticeable number of messages that showed up on our radar. When
individual members started talking about things getting slow, others would
chime in and state if they were affected, too. That way, we could quickly
gauge if this was a problem that was caused by our systems or a slow
internet connection. In any case, tribe members would try and help each
other immediately, which decreased the load on our customer service desk.
Another great result of being a part of the online teacher tribe was that
our most vocal evangelists were also among the most active members of
that community. Whenever something happened, good or bad, they would
amplify the message and color it in a way that would serve us. Something
good happened, and they would tell their peers how we were constantly
improving our product and their lives. Something bad happened, and they
would tell their peers that it wouldn't be a problem for long as we always
strived to fix issues quickly and provide as much value as we possibly
could. This way, any message that would make its way through the tribe
would effectively be positive and shine a favorable light on our business
without our involvement.
While there are many tribes already, you can also play a part in creating
one. Find people who share the same interests but are disconnected.
Facilitate them coming together and freely exchanging information without
any coercion or expectations. A tribe evolves slowly, and by guiding people
to build a community, you and your business can be an important pillar of a
long-term association of like-minded people.
Building a Tribe
It takes time to build a tribe. People don't trust easily, and they will be
skeptical of business leaders engaging them in their communities. Many
communities have experienced opportunistic advertisers coming in and
trying to sell them their products. As a consequence, almost all of those
communities have adopted policies that may look overprotective and overly
cautious, but they are the hard-learned lessons of keeping the community
from being spammed and falling into disarray.
That's why it's crucial to be a genuine contributor first. Don't rush in,
expecting that people will crown you as their leader within days. It often
takes a long time to establish a reputation of a trusted and valued member
of a tribe.
Play the long game here. Better yet, don't play any game at all: be in it
for the people, not for the money. Even if your business should fail, you
will still be in an excellent spot to try something else as a leader of a tribe of
passionate people centered around an idea.
A tribe is a commitment beyond your business. It's a community of
people who look beyond products and services. Even if you manage to sell
your product to lots of tribe members, their overarching interest is still
bigger than your product. Understand that you're in this for a long time, and
act accordingly. A good tribe will be a fertile ground for your ideas and
offerings for a long time, so you may as well get comfortable and take part
in growing and stabilizing your community.
POSITIONING IS WHERE IT’S AT
You can position your product in different ways in many different
markets. You may have started describing your product in a certain way,
only to find that your customers understand it very differently.
Many first-time founders make the mistake of iterating on their product
but keeping their positioning the same. Even if they're capable enough of
describing their product correctly the first time around so that customers
really "get it," they then miss their opportunities to keep the distance as
small as possible between what their product does and how their customers
perceive it.
April Dunford has an exceptional approach that will help you align how
you position your product with what your customers can understand. Find
the competitive alternatives first, then highlight the unique features you
have that they don't. Show how those features produce value for your
customers in fields that they care about, then contextualize it within the
market segment. You will end up with a comprehensive narrative that ties
together your unique offering and your customers’ needs.
Competitive Alternatives Are Not Just Competitors
The term “competitive alternatives” is intriguing. Competitors are not just
competing businesses doing more or less the same things you do. Excel,
Word, and plain old Post-its can be the current way a problem is solved.
Anything that provides your prospective customers some level of help when
solving a problem is a competitive alternative.
Making sure you know what is “comparable” to your product will be
necessary for highlighting the differentiators of your product. Look for
things that are very different from your product. It may not be a SaaS, but
an installable piece of software. It may not be software at all, but just a few
sheets of paper and a grid. It may even be something completely different,
like an intern or the work being outsourced to an agency of sorts. All these
things have entirely different value generation potentials and economics.
Make sure that the positioning of your service is clearly better than all those
alternatives.
Positioning and Value
Know who your product is for and speak their language, understand their
problems. Having domain expertise is very helpful here, and you should
validate your messaging before you apply it at scale. It's another rendition
of "talk to your customers." You'll be surprised by how something that's
perfectly clear to you can be confusing to someone in the industry you serve
if you don't know the intricacies of the domain-specific language.
When you want to convince a customer to buy a product, you usually
show them your value propositions. Value propositions can be leading or
lagging. That means some features have an immediate impact when being
used, and others will only show themselves in the long tail of using a
service. There are retention value propositions that you only use in
customer service situations (think of a conversation that contains the phrase
"See how easy this was? Next time you'll use this, it won't take more than a
minute") that are not going to sell the product to someone who is just
browsing. Make sure you use leading value propositions early and discuss
long-term benefits later in the customer journey.
I recommend listening to Andy Raskin’s talk about storytelling. He
recommends laying out the stakes: make your customers wonder why they
are on the road to ruin if they continue to do what they're doing. Show them
what the losers are moving away from, so they can understand that the
winners are moving toward your product. What does it take to win? What
do winners move toward? Answer those questions with your service, and
you'll have a strongly positioned product.
Talk about the problems you solve as obstacles to the goals of your
customers, not just disembodied issues. Give evidence that your solution
fosters belonging to the group of winners and believers. This results in great
opportunities for conversational marketing. An authentic message gets
spread for free.
There is nothing wrong with being specific. Going narrow could feel
like you're excluding parts of the market that could be your customers, but
it's an illusion. By making your positioning so compelling that your best-
fitting customers "get it" completely, you allow them to rephrase it most
fittingly when they talk to their peers. Trust that once you have conveyed
the value you provide to those who can most use it, they will take care to
explore the ways it can be described to a larger customer base for you. You
will see this in their public communication, in the social media posts they
create, and in the way they describe your product to other people in the
market. Find those conversations, and you can learn incredibly useful terms
and phrases that you can then leverage in your marketing.
The Context of Positioning Is Competition
When you position your product, don't obscure your competition. It may
feel dangerous to show your customers alternatives to your product, but it
really isn't, as long as you focus on what makes your product unique. That
way, you will allow people who use your competitors' products to have a
frame of reference and see if your service is a better fit for them.
Additionally, by talking about competitors, you will find that people reach
out to you and ask if you can also do something that services that you
would never have expected to be competitors allow them to do.
At FeedbackPanda, I never thought to encroach on the territory of text-
expansion products by building our own text snippet templating with
keyboard shortcuts. It was only after several customers asked if our product
had that capability that I noticed this was a competitive alternative to our
fully featured text templating application. The fact that we offered
"something like TextExpander" for their feedback attracted a number of
teachers who previously had not understood the use of our product. We
wouldn't even have needed to implement similar functionality: the category
alone made a number of prospective customers check out our product.
Positioning Is an Ongoing Process
Once you have your positioning working for your product, don't stop there.
There are two kinds of events that will require you to revisit your
positioning: product evolution and changes in the environment surrounding
your business.
Your product will change over time, either gradually or through a major
pivot. No matter how fast you get to this point, there will be a time when
the description you use in your positioning needs to be adjusted to fit the
service. Features come and go, and your product is a different beast at
launch than it will be a few years later. What started as a very niche product
could expand into a suite of tools, or what is learned from operating your
product for years will result in positioning or product changes later. A
previous startup that I co-founded pivoted from being a marketplace for
local food into local food subscription services for small businesses and
agencies. We had to adjust our positioning completely, as our audience
shifted substantially, which required an entirely different approach to
product, marketing, and sales.
Markets can change, as well. The longer you're around, the more the
business landscape will have moved. Things that were once unique to your
product may become commonplace, with competitors adopting them in
their own products. Regulation could cause your prospects to focus on
things that you never had to advertise in the beginning. When GDPR was
announced, all publishing services suddenly had to show that they were
compliant with the European privacy regulation, or else they would be a
risky service for their customers to use. When those businesses were
founded, none of them had to position themselves as a GDPR-compliant
service. Yet they all were forced to emphasize that part of their business—
and had to scramble and heavily adjust their products accordingly.
The important thing is to regularly update your positioning. At least,
take a look at your product, your business, and the landscape around it a
few times a year, or when things noticeably change. At those points,
schedule some time to reflect on whether your messaging is still aligned
with what you offer.
A UNIFIED VOICE: STAYING CONSISTENT WHEN
YOU GROW
At a certain point, it won’t be just you talking to your customers
anymore. Your employees will be the first touch-points for customer
interactions, co-founders and directors, and partners and other businesses.
What once was a unified voice—your voice—is now a chorus. If you want
to have a company that is consistent and aligned, you’ll need to be the
conductor of that chorus.
The reason that a chorus of 100 singers can create incredibly elegant
harmonies is that they have a central source of truth: a score written in
commonly readable music notation, and a conductor to help them keep in
sync. You will need to be all of that for your employees and co-founders.
Building a Source of Truth
Create a vision and mission document. Set the tone by explaining the
“Why” and the “How” in your own authentic voice. This document will be
the point of reference for any question that could crop up in the future.
Whenever an employee, co-founder, or a potential acquirer needs to learn
about the voice of your business, you can refer them to this writeup, as it
will settle any dispute and answer any question.
Write it down in extensive prose, or create a video in which you explain
your motivation and your aspirations. Share this with everyone who joins
the company, make it clear to them that this is the source of truth whenever
someone wonders how they should communicate the means and goals of
the business.
At FeedbackPanda, I stated in that document something along the lines
of “At FeedbackPanda, we want to enable our teachers who are likely to
come from fragile financial backgrounds. When they are in trouble, we help
them teach more by using our product until they can catch up.”
If you are a customer service representative tasked with deciding if a
customer should get a few weeks’ extension because their credit card is
overdrawn, you don’t have to think twice after reading this paragraph. This
is how you set the tone.
We outlined from where our desire to help online teachers came, how
we understood the product to help and enable them, and what we expected
their goals and aspirations to be. In the mission and vision document, the
most important topic to cover is your relationship with your customers. Are
you a friend? A colleague? Do you teach them? Do you help them with
work that they would otherwise have to do themselves?
In a way, this document reflects your internal positioning. Depending on
how you understand and communicate your relationship with your
customers, your actions and goals will change. Giving new employees and
partners the opportunity to see how you understand yourself and your
business is very valuable to prevent misunderstandings and misaligned
expectations.
Taking Care of the "How"
Echo the voice of your customers. Talk about them as they would talk
among themselves. Foster an understanding of the language used in the
industry you serve. Your customer service people should be able to
understand clearly what your customers are trying to do and be just as
easily understood.
This is particularly helpful for new hires in fields that interact a lot with
customers, such as customer support and sales. Giving those employees a
glimpse into the world of your customers is very helpful. For this, consider
describing in a page or two how your customers use your product, and how
they would solve their problem if they didn't have your product.
Contextualize the workflow of your customers for those employees who
may not know much about your industry. Give them the opportunity to look
into the tribal niche communities to get a feeling for the communication
patterns that dominate your customer base.
What happens when you move upmarket and the language of the
industry changes? You will need to adapt. The mission and vision document
is not an operations manual. It's a spiritual guide, in some way. Change into
a new consistency by revisiting the vision/mission documents, and educate
your employees about the differences they're likely to encounter. Never lose
track of your original vision, but focus on where you are at this very
moment.
THE GROWTH STAGE
SHOULD YOU SELL YOUR COMPANY?
Once you can comfortably run your business without needing to pivot,
hire employees, and expand into new segments of the market, you have
arrived at the Growth Stage. For many founders, this turns out to be quite a
dull phase of the business, as things tend to slow down. Processes are
introduced, dependencies are harder to avoid; communication complexity
makes decisions harder and takes more time.
If you’ve been working hard at automating and delegating, you will
have ended up with a business that runs like a well-oiled machine. You
barely have to spend any time on the operations, and you’re left with
making the company grow even more. You may be exploring new markets,
new products, or partnerships. At some point, you’ll find that things have
slowed down significantly. The days of frantically pushing out new releases
are over. Your MRR is likely in the high five figures, and you can afford to
pay your employees a solid salary. What now?
Unless you want to inject your bootstrapped business with millions of
venture capital suddenly, you have two options: stay in the company and
make it even bigger; or leave the company and sell it to someone interested
in growing the company further. Whatever choice you make, you can set
the foundations to make the most of it, both financially and professionally.
If you choose the “growth” option, you’ll spend the next couple of years
focusing on growing the team, building out a legacy, and eventually
replacing yourself with someone to do the work for you. You’ll receive
dividends over time, and you’ll retain ownership of the business.
If you choose the “exit” option, you’ll spend your time making yourself
replaceable as fast as you can, growing your wealth in a singular event, the
fabled exit, and then doing something else after a while.
Both options will lead to a life of wealth and doing what you want, just
on slightly different timelines. It boils down to your interest in being the
leader of a company that won’t be recognizable as a startup anymore:
processes and hierarchies will need to be put in place. Capable people who
can operate at scale will need to fill positions that were previously held by
quick learners who thrive on solving small-scale problems. Things will
change, and your choice is between being there to supervise the change or
putting the work and the risks of it in someone else’s hands entirely.
SELLING YOUR COMPANY
THE END OF AN ERA
There are three main reasons for wanting to sell a company: you've hit a
skill ceiling, you want to de-risk yourself, or you want to move on to
another project. Each of these reasons is in itself fueled by the unique goals
and aspirations of every founder, and they may appear at the same time.
In addition to those main three that occur for almost every founder at
some point, there will be any number of personal reasons unique to your
own situation. Some of them may not have anything to do with you, but
may be caused by the state of the economy around you.
Whatever the reasons may be, you should listen to the feeling inside
yourself. If selling the company feels like a viable option, examine that
feeling further and try to find the underlying motivation for the thought.
While often, it's a fleeting opportunistic feeling, it may also hint at some
deeply felt struggle within yourself.
Selling a company is a great way to capture the value you have built in
your company within a very short time. You will likely make a lot of money
in that sale, and it can change your life significantly.
The obvious drawback is that once you sell the company, any future
profits will go to the new owner of the business. If you keep running the
company, you will at least retain ownership, even if you replace yourself as
the operator of the business. But it will take much longer to generate and
extract the same amount of money that you could receive in a sale.
Every deal is different. There are many reasons why someone would
want to buy and how much they are willing to pay for a company. However,
there are many things you can do to maximize the value of the business and
make the selling process enjoyable and profitable.
AT A CROSSROADS: THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF
EXITS
Companies 
get 
acquired for a few reasons: they’re interesting
economically, they’re interesting strategically, their employees are
attractive, or they are a thorn in the eye of the acquirer, a foe to be
vanquished. Depending on why someone wants to buy your company, the
deal and the whole process of selling the company may be radically
different.
In any case, you will likely sell for quite some money. Usually, that
money arrives in two parts: one directly when you hand over the company,
and another when the transition is completed. The first part is usually a big
lump sum, while the second part is a safety retainer, a means to keep the
founder engaged and motivated. As you will need to transition the company
over to the acquirer, there will be a period of time when you will need to
train the team that takes over. In many cases, an earn-out may be part of the
exit, which means that your second part of the money is conditional to
reaching several business goals for the acquirer over a set period of time.
The Financially Motivated Acquisition
If someone wants to buy your company because your financial outlook is
impressive, your growth rates are high, and the future looks bright, they will
want to buy as soon as possible and keep the business running as-is as much
as they can. This is the most interesting kind of acquisition for a
bootstrapped founder. If buyers reach out to buy your business for financial
reasons, you know you have done everything right.
Your company will be a diversified income source, and the acquiring
company will likely need to find someone to fill your position as the owner
and operator of your business. The more documentation and automation
you have, the better. If you've been structuring and running your business
the "Built to Sell" way, you'll be in a very good position to hand it over
easily.
The value of your company will be determined purely by the numbers:
how much can your acquirer expect to make by running the company for a
few years? How easy will it be to continue to grow the business without the
founder? How easy will it be to transition the business into their
organization? The more value and the less work are involved here, the
higher the price.
Acquirers who buy businesses for this reason usually want to get the
deal done quickly, as a growing profitable business gets more valuable
every day. The earlier they can get their hands on it, the better. This will
affect the amount of money they will be willing to spend. To entice you to
sell it to them sooner than later, they may pay a premium for your business.
The Strategically Motivated Acquisition
Some companies acquire strategically. Your business may have an excellent
customer base for a segment into which they want to expand, or you have
some technology that they would rather buy than build themselves. It's
likely that significant changes will be made to your product. Many of your
customers will be nudged to buy different products, or they will see
dramatic price increases. Unlike a financial acquisition, it's not likely that
things will just go on as they did before.
As the founder, you will need to stick around for a bit, making sure that
the strategic benefit of the acquisition is realized for the company that
bought your business. As things change, you have to be comfortable seeing
your vision distorted and realigned with the strategy of another business.
Some founders have no trouble getting back into an employee-like position,
and others can't handle it. Be aware that there will be work, discussions, and
decisions that may be contrary to your beliefs, while large amounts of your
compensation could be locked up in the requirement that you stick around
for a long time.
The amount of money for which you can sell your company is less
easily calculated in this case, as this depends on the unique relationship
between the two businesses and the context of the market in which this
happens. Be prepared to receive completely different offers from different
interested parties. The differentiator you'll have to look out for more than
the money is the conditions of transitioning your business.
Be very aware of earn-out conditions (discussed later), which means
you have to stay on as the manager of the business and reach certain
business goals that someone else will set for you. Many founders fulfill
their earn-out obligations without issues, but there is a large number of
entrepreneurs who experience a number of complications.
The Talent-Motivated Acquisition
In rarer cases, a company may want to buy your company to get access to
your talent, usually called "acquihire." This supposes a certain size of your
business, but particularly with the skilled technical talent that surfaces
through the bootstrapping scene, it could happen at any size. If you're
reliably present in the bootstrapper and indie maker scene, certain
companies will look at you and your spirited efforts as a potential addition
to their equally ambitious team.
If you're a solo founder, this can put you in an interesting situation. A
company may want to hire you for several reasons, and some can work very
well for founders. Look at Stripe and their acquisition of the Indie Hackers
forums. They got a great entrepreneur, developer, and community leader in
Courtland Allen, and the Indie Hackers community can trust in the fact that
Stripe will keep the community running for a long time. A win for the
acquirer, a win for Courtland, and a big win for the community.
This kind of acquisition happens most often for businesses who are
quite young or aren't very profitable yet. At a certain point, the value of the
business in question will shift acquirers to put in an offer for financial
reasons, as the business itself, not just its owner, becomes an interesting
thing to have access to.
The Nuclear Option
Finally, a competitor may want to buy your company, take over your
customers, and shut down your product, while binding you to a non-
compete for a few years. Usually, founders like this option the least, as
nobody wants to see the business they built so carefully being eliminated
and forgotten. This kind of exit is a last-resort option, and it will usually
come at a hefty discount for the buyer. They understand that if you don't
have any other offers, they can offer whatever they want, and you'll take it.
Try to find a strategic buyer so that you at least have some leverage in
negotiating your price.
Whatever kind of offer comes your way, understand that they are all signs
of interest in your business, nothing more. You don't have to fear missing
out on the perfect offer. If your business has value, you will get multiple
offers eventually. You can actively seek out buyers yourself, have a broker
do the work for you, or just wait for offers to come in. In the end, it's all
optional, and you don't have to sell your business if you don't want to.
If you want to, try finding an acquirer who wants to acquire your
business for financial reasons. This kind of exit will have the clearest
alignment between buyer and seller interests, and there is a lot of useful
information available from other founders. And it will quite likely yield the
highest offers you could get.
PREPARING FOR THE SALE FROM DAY ONE:
GETTING THE DOCUMENTATION RIGHT
Before any acquisition can happen, many prerequisites need to be in
place. There will be an extensive due diligence process. Commonly, "buyer-
side due diligence" is the procedure of an acquirer making sure that
everything is in order with the business they are about to acquire. It's a
detailed investigation, making sure that everything you claimed and
promised about your business is actually true.
You can prepare your company for this process to happen as smoothly
as possible by following a few principles as you run your business. If you
need to scramble to get everything ready for due diligence only days before
it starts, you'll add a lot of extra work at a time when you're already under
twice the workload: you'll have to sort through a huge number of
documents and conversations as well as keep running your business at the
same time.
Selling the company can require a lot of work if you're unprepared. It
can be surprisingly easy and painless if you structure your business and
operations as if you intend to easily hand it over one day. This is the
moment when building the company in the "Built to Sell" way truly pays
off. With all the automation and documentation efforts that you will have
put into your business to make yourself as replaceable as possible, an
acquirer will take a look into your business and see a well-structured and
easy-to-transition company.
There are a number of steps that I have found particularly helpful,
which led to the successful sale of our startup FeedbackPanda.
Document Location
It starts with having all your relevant documents and resources securely
stored in cloud-based data storage such as Dropbox or Google Drive. This
allows you to access your own documents from anywhere, and it makes it
easy to deliver access to the storage service when you sell. Many businesses
will have their own document cloud solutions, so allowing them to integrate
all of your business documents into their systems rather than manually
importing everything is attractive.
Structure that storage in a way that makes it clear what each document
is, what it’s for, and who may need to use it. Using extensive naming
conventions is useful, as you want yourself and any future owner to be able
to find relevant documents quickly. Keep your essential assets, such as
logos and social media templates, in that storage as well. Ideally, all your
non-code assets are securely locked up in the same storage service.
Financial Account Separation
Keep your business and your personal accounts separate. This starts with
bank accounts. If you want to make sure you have a flawless separation
between your private funds and the funds of your business, get a business
bank account as soon as you can. While this will incur some fees in most
cases, it is also good practice, and it will protect you from diminishing your
personal accounts in case something goes wrong with your business.
Depending on what legal form your business takes, you will be required
to have such a separation anyway. If you don't exercise caution from the
beginning, any audit of your books will raise concerns in some
jurisdictions, and that can lead to hefty fines. If an acquirer purchases your
entire business, they also acquire this particular risk. You can prevent this
from having an impact on the purchase price by ensuring the personal and
business records are cleanly separated .
This may be the most important thing to get right from the beginning.
You can always untangle usernames and passwords at a later point, but a
transaction that hit the wrong account and was taxed differently than it
should have been cannot be reversed easily after the fact.
Service Account Separation
It's also recommended that you keep your service accounts separate. Create
a separate Google account for your business and use that to log into the
services you use for your company via OAuth2, or use your business email
and a strong password.
Keep all of the login details in a separate 1Password vault, and keep
only logins and secure notes related to your business in there. That way,
when you hand over your business, all you need to do is to invite your
acquirer into that vault, and all relevant credentials will be available to them
immediately.
In the beginning, you will likely have just one email address, like
"firstname@yourdomain.com." Mostly, because you don't need another, but
also, because if you're using Google Accounts, you will pay per account. I
recommend at least making an alias like "services@yourdomain.com" and
logging into services using email and password whenever possible. The
convenience of logging in with your founder account could be alluring in
the beginning, but just like with your bank accounts, it will pay off to have
everything separated from any account that is linked to you as a person.
Thorough Documentation
It’s important to document everything—even how you're documenting
things. I don't think there is a way to over-document when it comes to
something as important as the inner workings of a business. Superfluous
documentation can be ignored if it's not needed. Still, there is no way to
reconstruct what the original founder of the business did or meant to do
when there is no trace of any document or instruction.
Write an extensive Operations Manual from day one. If you do
something more than once in your business, write a Standard Operating
Procedure for it. It'll be great for transitioning your business over to your
successor. Even the smallest task will need to be mentioned or explained,
and creating an SOP as soon as you're done with a new task will make sure
it won't be forgotten.
If you answer a question in your customer service tool, turn it into a
knowledge base article and link to it in your Operations Manual. The more
advanced knowledge base system will integrate with your customer service
chat systems and suggest articles when they detect certain search terms.
This will save you countless hours of customer support, and having the
documentation in place will be a great training opportunity for your
acquirer's customer service agents, as it gives you the opportunity to gauge
what types of problems your customers may experience.
Handing over such a document will be almost like a franchise: the new
owner will know exactly how to deal with all parts of the business. They
can immediately start running it and training their employees to take over
critical functions. The more you document, the faster you can be replaced.
PRIMING YOUR BUSINESS FOR DUE DILIGENCE
In preparation for a due diligence process, there are a few things you can
routinely update and use. Most of these things have to do with financial and
business metrics, while others are legal requirements.
The Profit & Loss Sheet
One of the first things any interested party will expect you to provide is a
Profit & Loss Sheet, often called the P&L. In its most basic form, it's a
spreadsheet outlining your expenses and revenue history, month over
month. Some P&L sheets are highly detailed, down to describing each
individual expense, while others group expenses into broader categories.
All P&L sheets track the relevant business figures of the past, while some
also include projections into the future.
There is a certain political element to this kind of document: it shows
where you're coming from, where you want to go, and where you will go if
things continue to work the way they do right now. The projections, if
sound, are particularly interesting for a potential acquirer. As the P&L is
usually the first document a buyer gets to see, it is often used to anchor their
expectations.
It is good business hygiene to have such a document from the beginning
and to update it with the latest numbers once every month. This will allow
you to have insight into the developments of your bottom line and give
interested parties a quick and cursory glance into the current health and
attractiveness of your business.
Internal Metrics
For the internal metrics of your business, I recommend using tools like
ProfitWell or Baremetrics. Those business analytics services hook into your
payment processor and use your subscription data to extract trends, key
numbers, and aggregate numbers. While many payment providers have
rudimentary dashboards and statistics pages, these business metrics tools
are focused on obtaining the most meaningful numbers and making them
actionable.
Often, since these services aggregate business data from many similar
businesses, you can see how well you're doing compared to similar
businesses that use those services. I always found it very reassuring to see
that our churn rates were significantly lower than the average figures of
businesses which had customers with similar lifetime values. We learned of
a few parts of our business where we lagged behind, and that allowed us to
focus on improving neglected areas of the business like the number and
value of failed credit card charges.
All the business analytics services have slightly different ways of
calculating values like your Monthly Recurring Revenue, and they may not
be completely accurate—in fact, they probably won't be as accurate as a tax
report would need them to be. For example, this happens because, at some
point, the developers who built those analytics tools made a choice about
when a charge should be counted as “completed”: either when the customer
subscribes, when their credit card is charged, or when the money actually
hits your bank account. The same is true for unpaid but outstanding
invoices: do they count? At a certain scale, this will make quite a difference
in the final calculation. Every business analytics tool makes different
choices here, so the numbers say a little.
However, you get a lot of insight into customer segmentation, retention,
churn, and other relevant SaaS metrics, for free or for a low price.
Actionable information that allows you to make smart business decisions is
worth a lot more than just having accurate numbers. It's the actionable
insight that you'll be using these tools for, and it won't make a difference if
your churn is reported at 24.8% if it really is 24.5%—you have to do
something about it either way.
These services offer read-only accounts with anonymized data that you
can share with interested parties, so they have immediate insight into the
metrics of your business without being able to see who your customers are.
The Power of Forecasting
Where analysis tools look into your past, forecasting tools look into your
future. A tool like Summit will hook into your payment processor's data as
well, and then give you projections and forecasts into the future of your
business. You will be able to set goals and simulate how your growth would
be affected if specific goals were reached or missed.
Forecasting will allow you to explore several scenarios of where your
business could go if you made certain decisions that are hard to reverse and
would be very risky to attempt in reality: hiring a number of people,
switching to another audience completely, or pivoting to another kind of
product. It's business experimentation powered by statistical models that are
at least less biased than your hopeful entrepreneurial perspective. It's a
projection of your ambitions into the future.
Being able to share this kind of projection will give your acquirer the
confidence that you have thought about these things, and there is a
statistically significant chance that the goals you have set may be reached in
reality. If you have been using forecasting tools for a while, it will also
show your buyer how well you've been able to reach the goals you have set.
This will be very helpful in conveying your expertise as a founder and
industry expert.
Becoming Aware of Liabilities
When it comes to legal tripwires, make sure you have your software
licenses under control. Use tools that extract all the licenses used in your
codebase, and turn this into a living document. When you use software that
has no license attached, you may need to replace or modify it to comply
with legal requirements. The same care should be taken with intellectual
property rights and any trademarks you may own. In general, everything
that touched a lawyer's hands at some point should be part of your digital
documentation.
Are you currently involved in any litigation or lawsuits, or have you
been threatened with that? Disclose it immediately. If there are any
customers, ex-employees, or partners that may cause you trouble, point it
out. Mention and list all past legal actions by or against your company, too.
These things will be found out, and unless you're proactive about disclosing
them, they will be the biggest red flags for buyers. Usually, at the first sign
of legal trouble that was not mentioned immediately by the seller, a buyer
will retreat from the acquisition. Be honest, forthcoming, and clear about
the realistic consequences of those legal issues.
Codifying the Secret Knowledge
Finally, there are things that only you know: trade secrets, unfair
advantages, insight into the industry that no one else has. How can you
transfer that knowledge? You will need to find a way to put your insight
into writing or another permanent and shareable form.
I recorded an 11-hour video walkthrough of the FeedbackPanda
codebase before we sold the business so that my replacement would
understand why the code was structured the way it was. That kind of
information will differ for you, I am sure, but it needs to be ready to be
transferred eventually, so it’s better to start early.
Prepare for Controlled Handholding
The due diligence process will require a lot of work and focus from you.
While the buyer will ask for insight, just sending documents to them won't
do you any good. You will need to guide them to the information they seek,
because the entire due diligence process is a trust-building exercise, and
your involvement in building the relationship in this process will set the
tone for years to come.
Start by explaining your documents and what they contain in an
overview document. Provide a master document that gives your buyer quick
access to the data they're looking for at a glance. If you're storing all of your
documents in cloud storage like Google Drive, you can cross-link between
documents easily. Anything you can do to speed up information retrieval
will make the due diligence process less stressful.
While the due diligence phase usually comes with certain legal
guarantees, don't be naive: there will be bad actors in the field, and some
people will just promise more than they're willing to do. While most buyers
are serious, some may just want to take a look under the hood of your
business. For that reason, I recommend staging the release of information,
starting with the least sensitive (like an accurate yet not too detailed P&L
sheet), and keeping the most critical information (like your internal
roadmap documents) until the very end. Don't share secrets. Never let your
buyer access the account details of your customers without anonymizing
them. Imagine what could happen if a competitor, disguised as a potential
acquirer, gets their hands on your customer data. Don't make this possible.
Finally, make a checklist for yourself long before you ever get into the
due diligence process. Your acquirer will likely also have one, and the more
similar they are, the less you will have to scramble to prepare. Many serial
acquirers will have a checklist that has been developed over many years,
and they will make sure that all their bases are covered. You can help them
develop that trust for you and your product by being meticulous about
keeping your documents and affairs in order. The more organized you are,
the less extra work will come your way. After all, you will still have a
business to run during all of this.
SO YOU GOT AN OFFER: DUE DILIGENCE ON
YOUR POTENTIAL ACQUIRER
There is almost no better and, at the same time, terrifying feeling than
when you receive an email from someone who wants to acquire you. There
was great joy when that happened to us at FeedbackPanda. Immediately
after, we started to think about the level of risk to which we were about to
expose our company.
The moment you allow a third party into your company, you lose a little
bit of control. Someone is checking out if you’re an exciting business for
them to purchase, and they will require some information that you've never
shown anyone before. Making sure that you don’t get into trouble from that
is paramount.
In a company acquisition, it’s usually the acquirer who conducts
thorough due diligence. We believe that before that happens, you, the seller,
should do an equally exhaustive due diligence of your potential acquirer.
When Do You Need a Lawyer?
This is a question many founders often ask at this point. They have received
an email or a phone call from a party expressing interest in buying their
company or product. At this point, most founders wonder if they need to
talk to a lawyer immediately.
I don’t think that a lawyer is required at this point. Lawyers are
expensive, and if you were to engage one for every party that expresses
interest, you would soon be poor. Usually, you will want to hire legal
professionals when you start signing documents that lock you into things
that can’t be reversed, like complicated non-disclosure agreements or
agreements that forbid you from talking to other parties.
Once you are presented with such a document, I would suggest finding
a lawyer and have a cursory talk about the process. If you feel that anything
may limit you beyond the scope of mutual due diligence between the
prospective buyer and you, intensify the conversation with your legal
counsel.
The moment you are ready to sign a Letter of Intent, you should
definitely involve a lawyer. From here on out, you’ll be entering the selling
process, and you will need to make sure that you’re protected. You can
anticipate that the buyer has a lawyer on their side, as it’s probably not the
first time they have purchased a company or product.
In the bootstrapped world, the first document to change hands is usually
some sort of Profit & Loss sheet, and many transactions happen without any
non-disclosure documents existing at this point. I recommend reaching out
to other founders who have sold to your potential acquirer before and ask
them for their experience and recommendations. With FeedbackPanda, we
did just that, and it worked out well, as it allowed us to align our
expectations with the reality of the whole acquisition process. We felt good
the whole way, from first contact throughout the due diligence process. But
when in doubt, consider reaching out to a legal professional.
Research the Company, Research the Person
The first and most important question you will need to answer is if this is a
real person with the intent to actually purchase your business. Many bad
actors are trying to scam business owners or extract sensitive information
from companies. Good actors will have a track record of successfully
buying businesses. Bad actors will not.
To verify the truthfulness of the offer, research the person that contacted
you, and the company for which they work. Like real estate, acquisitions
are mostly a reputation game. Parties who want to continue acquiring
valuable businesses will need to present themselves as honest, respectful
businesses. A botched acquisition or unethical behavior will cause a lot of
damage to the brand, and bad news travels fast.
Look for traces of bad behavior and complaints both for the person
reaching out and their company. That’s quickly done with a Google search
with something like “<company name> acquisition problem.”
Look for public appearances by the person reaching out to you or the
CEO of the company that has expressed intent to acquire you. See how you
feel about dealing with this person. If you feel an instinctive attraction,
great. If you don’t like them, make a note. While an acquisition is a deal
between companies, it’s transacted between people. If the relationship
doesn’t work, the deal could sour.
Research the Portfolio and Make a List
Next, look into the companies and products that the acquirer already owns
and operates. Are these businesses with which you want to be associated?
Do you think they could benefit from your business strategically? Or is it
just a financially motivated acquisition? You’ll have a much clearer
understanding of this once you figure out what your acquirer is already
doing.
This is most easily done through Google search as well. You can usually
find portfolio companies and products by googling for the full legal name
of the acquirer, as it will be in the Terms & Conditions, which are often the
same for all portfolio companies.
At this point, you should make your first list. Put down the name of the
company or product, and find out who sold it to your acquirer. That will
require some exploration and research, as pre-acquisition names are usually
removed from the properties after they are purchased.
You can likely find traces of the names of the original founders in these
locations:
old company blog posts
source code of the website
old commits in public open-source code repositories
public interviews about the sale of the company
Finding public information about the sale and the conversations that
often happen around it will give you some insight into the process, as
founders who have sold their businesses are frequently asked about the
details of the process. I talked about this on Indie Hackers a few months
after going through the sale of FeedbackPanda.
If you can’t find public information about the sale, ask yourself why
that is. It doesn’t have to be sinister, as some founders like to keep their
privacy, mainly when they just sold their business for many millions of
dollars. Being too public can lead to a lot of stress, so many founders keep
it a secret. Finding those founders will take more work, but it’s worth it.
Request a List of References from Your Acquirer
Once you have a reasonable list of at least five founders who have sold to
your acquirer before, I suggest asking the person who contacted you to give
you a list as well. Ask them for a list of founders you can contact and ask
about the process. Most acquirers are prepared for this and will present you
with a few names and email addresses, and they may even make
introductions.
While this is an excellent sign of trust and transparency, I advise you to
be careful. The list an acquirer gives you will likely only include references
that will be very positive and supportive of the acquirer. In most cases, that
is because the acquirer is doing honest and reputable work, so their
references will reflect that. However, there is a chance that a few people had
less-than-optimal experiences, and they are likely not on that list.
Due Diligence Calls
To find the most interesting people to talk to, take your list, take their list,
and make a shortlist with the founders that are on your list, but not theirs.
Your chances of finding potential red flags and problems are highest here.
Call those founders first, or send them an email explaining why you are
interested in talking to them. If they have warnings to give, they will reach
out quickly, provided that they are allowed to talk about their experience.
Then, call the founders on your buyer’s list. While those founders are
pre-selected for you, they will still give you great insight into the process
and what to look out for.
In our case, the introductions from this list gave us the chance to talk to
people we had only ever interacted with on Twitter. Having a personal
connection to people who went through the same thing makes selling a
company much less scary.
Here are the questions that we would ask in every call, to anyone on our
list and on theirs:
Question 1: How Was the Transition Period? Was It Frantic, Was It
Professional?
You’ll want to learn about the amount of work that will be ahead of you
once you hand over the reins. Some companies make it extremely easy, as
they may already have a team in place to take over the operations. Others
may need you to stick around and help them get on their feet. Ask which
steps your reference had to take while transitioning the company and if
there were any surprises.
Question 2: Do You Feel the Acquirer Served Your Business Well? Are
Their Goals Similar to Yours?
Alignment is incredibly hard to predict. It’s a mindset problem, and you
can’t expect to know how compatible you’ll be before you’re working with
the acquirer. But you can ask the founder you’re calling how well they were
aligned: were there differences of opinion? Where did the business go
during their transition? They won’t be able to give you details, but they will
be able to express their sentiments.
Question 3: Did They Trap You in Some Way? Did You Need to Stay on
Longer than Required?
This is really about clarity and expectation management. You’re likely
selling your company with future plans in mind; you may have other
projects to take care of, personally or professionally. Ask the founder you’re
calling if the acquirer made an effort to be truthful, clear, and precise in
their communication. Ask how well they responded to questions about these
things as well.
Question 4: Did They Take Care of the Team?
If you have employees, they will likely migrate to your acquirer. Ask
the founder you’re calling about how smooth that transition was for them (if
they had employees). Ask if people were let go, and how well the ones that
stayed were integrated into the team. Were there incentives for their
employees to stay? Were there guarantees?
Question 5: Do They Understand the Businesses They Run? What Is
Their Ultimate Goal with Them?
Some acquirers have been around for a long time and may have dozens
of similar businesses in their portfolio. Others may just be starting. Ask
your reference how well the acquirer understood the business they bought,
and how much work went into non-operational knowledge transfer. If they
had to explain to their acquirer what a SaaS business is, that may be a
problem.
Question 6: Figure Out If They Acquired for Financial or Strategic
Reasons
If your business is acquired for financial reasons, the acquirer may have
different expectations of your involvement than if they bought your
business for strategic reasons. Get a feeling for the kinds of acquisitions
made by your acquirer.
Make Notes on What Stands Out
What is your reference talking about, what are they not talking about? Are
there topics they don’t want to talk about, where they change the subject of
the conversation? Are there things they are very passionate about? Put those
notes on your list.
Do a Background Check on the Finances
Ask for and do a background check that indicates from where the money in
the company that acquires you comes. Are those clean sources? Is your
acquirer willing to talk about the origin of their funding? Is it publicly
available information, or are they secretive about it? Private Equity is often,
well, private, but that should not mean that you have to be completely in the
dark. When asked for in confidence, an ethical businessperson will give you
at least some information about the funding they use to invest.
Red Flags
Here are several things that should raise the alarm in your mind when doing
your own due diligence on your potential acquirer:
Red Flag 1: There Is No Public Information About the Acquirer
It’s relatively easy to create a presence on the internet. If your acquirer
does not have this, you should wonder why they would want to stay in the
shadows. A company blog or at least a landing page should be present for
any serious business. If there is none, this points at severe information
asymmetry. In the end, that makes an interaction with such a potential
acquirer very risky for someone like you: a founder who has to both run
their business and research another one at the same time.
Red Flag 2: You Ask for a Specific Reference, and They Ignore that
Request or Try and Dissuade You
If there is a person that someone does not want you to talk to, that
should make you very wary. As I said, the acquisition business is a
reputation game. If there is dirt that a company wants to sweep under the
rug by making it inaccessible to you, that shows a lack of transparency and
professionalism.
Red Flag 3: They Ask You to Sign Extensive NDA Constructs Before
Talking to You
The more complicated the legal documents you’re presented with, the
worse off you’ll be. Acquirers have legal teams to deal with Mergers &
Acquisitions (M&A) while you have to run your business, grow your
business, and deal with the acquisition offers. There is much more risk to
your business in these talks than to theirs, so why would they need to annoy
you with a time-wasting legal requirement? After all, it’s just a
conversation. At best, this is wasting your time. At worst, it could be an
intentional attempt at distracting you from doing your work.
Red Flag 4: They Demand Access to Very Sensitive Data
If an acquirer asks you to give them access to things like your customer
contact information, stop and think immediately. What could someone do
with this information? Is the acquisition offer an attempt to grab your data?
Make sure that they only have access to read-only data, limited views, and
can’t easily export all of your sensitive information.
Red Flag 5: They Want to See the Real Data (Instead of Just Reports)
If an acquirer asks to see the data of individual customers before you
sign a Letter of Intent and start the real due diligence, be careful. Even after
signing the Letter of Intent, which is a non-binding agreement, you should
make efforts to restrict access to this information. The acquirer can always
back out of the transaction later, but you stand to gain nothing. If you must,
give them partial access, but don’t give them everything just yet. That is
what happens when you actually sell the business, not before.
Red Flag 6: They Decline to Sign Your NDA But Still Want to See the
Real Data
If your acquirer truly needs to see sensitive data, you have the right to
demand that they sign a non-disclosure agreement. Provide a simple one,
that categorically states that access to your information is for exploration
purposes only. If you feel like you need to protect your data at this point,
reach out to a lawyer with M&A experience and have them draft an NDA
for you. You have to feel comfortable throughout this experience. No
serious buyer with a reputation to protect will be surprised by you being
protective with your business information. They may even expect it. It’s
safe to say that no acquirer with good intentions ever wants you to feel
uneasy about any part of your interaction.
Red Flag 7: They Are Not a Culture Fit
Working the transition will be very hard if they’re not on your level.
During the transition period, you will effectively be colleagues. You’ll be
spending a lot of time with people inside your acquirer’s organization. If
you feel that everyone you’ve been talking to interacts awkwardly, you may
want to consider backing out of the deal.
At FeedbackPanda, we made sure we checked for all of these red flags
when talking to potential acquirers. When we interacted with SureSwift
Capital, we were pleasantly surprised to find how professional and
transparent they were from the beginning. But we still checked for every
single potential issue, and we found no problems.
Trust is earned. That’s why doing your own due diligence on your
acquirer is essential and needs to be conducted with care. Try being realistic
about the transaction. There will be small obstacles and conflicts of interest.
But you can talk these things through. In the end, both businesses want to
benefit from an acquisition, and an optimistic perspective will make this an
enjoyable process.
How to Prepare for Your Due Diligence
Finally, now that you have taken an in-depth look at your potential acquirer,
here are a few things you can do to prepare for their due diligence on you.
Follow the scene. Listen to podcasts and read blog posts by the funds
and Private Equity companies and brokers in your industry. That way, you
will understand not only what multiples businesses are selling at, but you
will also get to know the people who are involved in those businesses. I had
been aware of SureSwift Capital long before they reached out to us since
they had been present in the bootstrapper scene for a long time, providing
blog content and being on podcasts and interviews.
Always have a Profit & Loss sheet ready, and keep it current. This is
just good business practice. If you’re tracking your business metrics, you
also want to use several analytic tools like ProfitWell and Baremetrics. If
you’re among the emerging group of founders who are using planning and
forecasting tools like Summit, having your forecasts and plans available for
acquirers to look into will also give you an edge when negotiating the sale.
Set up read-only accounts with these tools so you can quickly provide them
to interested parties.
I recommend reading Built to Sell and listen to the Built to Sell Radio
podcast. John Warrillow offers hundreds of episodes about people selling
their business, mostly as interviews. I listened to almost all of them in
preparation for our due diligence, and the recurring themes in those
interviews gave me valuable insight into what questions I should ask.
And most of all, relax. I know this is an exciting time, and the thoughts
of life-changing amounts of money are just as prevalent as the thoughts of
dangers and risks of such an important transaction. Talk to your spouse, talk
to your parents, talk to trusted friends. Don’t rush things, and most
importantly, keep your business running. Sometimes, what sounds like a
dream opportunity turns into a risky gamble, and you will back out. That is
perfectly fine, maybe even necessary. You will know when the time is right.
And now you also know what you’ll need to do.
EARN-OUTS: STICKING AROUND AFTER YOU
SELL
In some cases, you may be able to sell your company with a transition
period where you are expected to be reachable and support your team and
the people who replace you when they need help. This could last anywhere
from three months to a year or more, but in general, it doesn’t involve you
working full-time for your acquirer.
In other cases, you will be expected to keep running the business like
before, with the only difference being that you’re not an owner anymore:
you are now an employee.
Why Earn-Outs?
Earn-outs are usually considered when the seller is required to keep the
business running due to their direct involvement. It’s needed for companies
that don’t yet have a team in place to take over all the visible and hidden
tasks of said business. It is a risk-minimization strategy for the buyer. It de-
risks their acquisition by making sure that someone capable will be
available to deal with the unexpected events that can occur in any business.
But it can be a risky move for the seller. Instead of handing over your
business and taking the money, you're binding yourself to another business
for a set time period without being able to enjoy the same level of
entrepreneurial freedom as before. Particularly if you’re committing to a
year-long relationship as an employee, you will now be under completely
different limitations than before.
The Risks and Limitations of an Earn-Out
There are many very real risks and limitations that you should be aware of
if you're considering selling your business with an earnest clause attached.
I'm not advising against taking this option, as it is quite a common thing for
certain kinds of acquisitions, but a solid awareness of what could go wrong
and how to prevent that will give you clarity into what you can expect.
The biggest risk is that an earn-out will lock up a large portion of your
compensation in reaching a number of goals. Often, growth goals need to
be reached to get the full amount. Unlike with a complete sale where you
exit the company as soon as possible, you will need to stay on in a position
where you have no control over the course of your business and the
economy it's in. If a recession hits a year into your two-year earn-out, you
may not be able to hit your goals, and a portion of the money you were
promised becomes unavailable. That is a lot of risk, particularly if all your
wealth is locked up in your business.
It's not like you wouldn't have been exposed to industry and economic
risk if you had not sold the business, but this time, your hands are at least
partially tied. One thing that will be noticeably different is that your actions
will need to be signed off, or at least discussed with the owners. Gone will
be the day of just randomly trying out new services or products to see if
they fit. You may get a budget for this, but every purchase will require some
sort of approval. Changing a feature or wording on your landing page will
require approval. You'll need to justify all your choices.
The goals you signed up for could become unattainable when funding
for the project dries up, or strategic changes are implemented. Some
acquirers have been found to use this legally questionable sabotage to pay
their sellers less than they had promised. It doesn't happen often, but it
happens. That's why doing seller-side due diligence on your acquirer is such
an important step in this process. The moment you learn of this behavior,
step back from the deal.
Another thing you'll have zero control over is a rare but ground-shaking
event: the company that acquires you may also get acquired. At that
moment, every agreement you may have had before becomes a negotiable
liability. When this happens, the risk that your agreement may not be
honored anymore increases substantially. Goals may change, budgets may
shift, permissions could be restricted, key employees may not be transferred
to the new owner. Any organizational structure you may require can
evaporate from one day to the other.
Handling the Risks of an Earn-Out
You can protect yourself from these risks by asking for the most substantial
part of your money up front. Then, understand that the remaining portion
that's in limbo has a chance of never reaching your bank account. If you
reframe it as a bonus on top of the guaranteed portion, you won't feel as
much pressure to reach it no matter what or regret the loss if things don't
work out.
Also, getting an M&A lawyer with experience in earn-outs to look over
your purchase documents will allow you to remove dangerous clauses. In
addition to having your legal counsel inspect your contracts very closely, I
recommend taking some time to listen to the Built to Sell radio podcast
hosted by John Warrillow, who interviews founders who have sold their
business. Many guests on that show had earn-out experiences, and the
majority ran into an issue along the way. In preparation for selling
FeedbackPanda, I listened to more than 100 episodes of this podcast to
make sure I knew about every possible problem I could encounter. While
our acquisition process with SureSwift Capital was extremely painless, it
was good to understand where things could have gone wrong.
The best way to not get these kinds of earn-out-based offers in the first
place is to build a great business that gets so many competing acquisition
offers that you can choose the ones that will allow you to walk away with as
much cash and as few commitments as possible.
WHAT’S NEXT? THE SURPRISING
CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING SOLD A BUSINESS
It is a strange thing. We started a business from nothing. Danielle and I
grew FeedbackPanda to an incredible size—one we definitely didn't expect
ever to reach. And then we sold it. Fanfares! Victory! Life-changing
amounts of money. A lot of high-fiving and cheers. We eagerly watched our
bank account every day, and one day, the number just jumped. It was an
ecstatic moment, and we knew that things would be different from here on
out. I was incredibly happy, and I had just accomplished the greatest
success of my life.
We started migrating over the company to our acquirer, handed over the
reins, and trained our successors. It was a fun, professional, and rewarding
experience for anyone involved. We had done it. We had built a business,
and we had successfully exited it. Now we could direct our attention to new
and exciting things.
And then, out of nowhere, despair. From one moment to another, I got a
sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach.
We always talk about the valley of death that threatens SaaS businesses.
We don't talk about the valley of despair that you are likely to fall into the
moment you hand over the keys to your business. I've felt it for myself, and
I have heard other founders talk about it, both in public and even more in
private. Every founder who has sold their business has a desperation story.
The better you built your company, the harder it will be on you. Here is
what I experienced: all of a sudden, I was wandering around without
anything to do. Before, I would get up every single day, ready to throw
myself into work, but there was a void now. Other people now did all that
work. They asked for my help from time to time, sure, but the responsibility
for the work was ultimately on them. I was just a source of support in their
transition of the business to the acquirer.
I had no roles anymore. I couldn't "just do things" any longer. Another
developer was in charge of the code. Another customer service agent was in
charge of helping the customers. Another product manager took over the
product and started making decisions. I was an ex-founder.
That hit me hard. When you are used to working seven days a week,
being an entrepreneur almost every waking hour, it will come as a shock
that, within a day, your whole life comes to a grinding halt. All of a sudden,
there is a profound change in what you have control over. Your business
isn't yours anymore.
Routines you built for years are pointless. I felt disoriented and
confused. If you're not prepared for this change, it can hit you pretty hard. I
had to consciously prevent myself from opening my Intercom dashboard to
see who had created new customer support tickets during the night. I had to
stop checking the error reporting tools and infrastructure health dashboards
as I had done every morning over the last two years.
It was just so unexpected. And that is pretty ironic, considering that I
had read up on the potential issues that being acquired may cause. I knew
that many founders had expressed trouble reorienting themselves. I had
dismissed those claims, thinking that, unlike them, I could adapt to this
easily. But it was very hard to adapt to this change. It just came too
abruptly, upsetting a balance that had been carefully constructed over the
years.
I am aware that this is complaining at a very high level, and to any
entrepreneur who struggles to find their first paying customer, it may even
sound insultingly arrogant. We had just sold our business and had elevated
ourselves into a whole new state of being, into a post-economic state of
mind. That is what life-changing amounts of money can do. So, instead of
continuing to grumble about how hard the change was, let me share what I
did to avoid the post-sale emptiness.
First off, Danielle and I took a vacation. After years of only leaving the
country on business-related trips, we finally forced ourselves to disconnect.
That worked really well, as a change of scenery opens up your mind, and
seeing how everyone just goes through their own lives doing what they
want to do will make you think about your own future. This kind of
thinking allows you to reset your mind from the routines and preconceived
notions that you may have built up over the years.
I then reflected on what had just happened. Over the last few years, we
had built a thriving business that helped teachers become better at what they
do, and we were rewarded handsomely. At that moment, I understood that it
was my time to teach. I started writing about my experiences, about the
things we learned, and how we failed. That was my path forward.
We made sure we built a network before we quit. Keep in touch with
your team, with the people you met along the journey. Many opportunities
come from these kinds of connections. Don't think you have to sever ties
with anyone just because you sell the business. You're still the person who
made it possible, the founder who built something valuable from nothing.
That makes you a very desirable contact and a peer to many successful
founders.
If you must, look for a new project soon after. Some founders just have
to work on something. They can't take a break. That's fine as long as you
take care of your mental and physical health. A sale gives you the
opportunity for a break. Once you have had some time to reflect on what
you need to live a healthy and happy life, you can jump right back in.
Without taking this time, you'll just run on auto-pilot, which will limit the
scope of what you could accomplish now that you are in such an improved
position.
The great thing about having worked in a SaaS business for years is that
you will have encountered dozens of little problems that needed to be
solved inside your business. Any of those could be turned into another
business. Reflect on where you built a dirty quick fix to get things done and
see if that points at a critical problem for other founders as well. This kind
of awareness will also help you detect other audiences that have unsolved
critical problems, which could make for great research subjects for your
next entrepreneurial adventure.
But it’s still important to take a moment to reflect on how fortunate you
are. The work has paid off; the thing you built mattered enough for others to
take notice, and they made you an offer you couldn't refuse. Take it in, and
look at how you can have an impact like this again—or do something even
greater in the future.
KEEPING YOUR COMPANY
Let’s be quite clear here: I don't have much experience with keeping a
large company running. We sold FeedbackPanda when we reached the point
of continuous growth. I've certainly worked for larger companies but never
held more than a fraction of the shares, so my ownership perspective is
limited. I will still give you my opinion on the topic because I feel that there
is more than just advocating selling your business.
I understand that you can retain ownership in a business and never sell
it, generating constant income through a salary or dividends and bonuses.
You won't be able to have a big payday like you would have if you sold
your business, but you will be able to grow both the value of your business
and your personal wealth steadily, at the same time.
And more often than not, founders really like their work. They build a
business because of a vision they have, and they want to continue making it
a reality for as long as possible. They enjoy showing up every single day,
throwing themselves at problems and opportunities. It's not surprising that
even after selling a business, most founders turn into serial entrepreneurs
and jump at every opportunity that would allow them to get back right into
the thick of it.
If you like your work, work. Continue with your business, grow it
further, make it help more customers. Take it as far as it will go. Every day
will surface new challenges for you to overcome. The value of your
business will grow consistently, and new learnings will level up your
expertise over time.
If you start disliking your work, delegate. Remove yourself from the
operational parts of the business by hiring a director, as many late-stage
founder-CEOs do. Hire someone good at leading a company and making
sure it stays on track. Then, leave the main stage and just be an owner, a
shareholder. Maintain the vision, make sure the company does what you
think it should be doing, but do it through guidance instead of leadership.
It's quite likely that you will see changes you never expected to see in
your business. You have your own idea of how things should be done, and
you have been successful in seeing it applied to your business. Overcoming
this confirmation bias will be essential when you hand over the reins: other
leaders will lead differently. Preparing for those changes will make the
transition much more comfortable. The goal is to continue growing the
company, not growing complacent.
If you follow the methodology in Michael E. Gerber's book E-Myth
Revisited, you will have created a fictional organizational chart before you
started your business. Over time, you will have hired people into the
positions on that chart, and your name will have moved more and more to
the top. There will be the day where you strike your name from the
operational part of that chart so that it only remains on top of the page
where the owners are listed. Celebrate that day, as this is the ultimate
entrepreneurial accomplishment: you have taken the final step of creating a
business that works for you.
To step back from your CEO position with confidence, you will need to
find someone to replace you. They will need to replace you as a leader, as a
manager, and as the source of truth and vision. Start looking for that person
early, and make sure they care about your business and your customers as
much as you do. This person will have to maintain and expand a culture of
collaboration and support. Technical skills can be acquired, but they will
need to bring a longing for building tribes and communities from day one.
And you can still have your financial windfall: there is always the
option of selling a minority stake in your business. The buyer of that stake
would get all the benefits of owning parts of a sustainable and lucrative
business without needing to put much effort into the operational or even
strategic work. You, as the owner, would still have full control over the
company. If you are left with a substantial amount of cash from selling the
minority stake, you will always be able to draw dividends from the
business, and you will have the freedom to continue to run the business as
you please.
I sold FeedbackPanda because, among other reasons, I felt the need to
diversify my assets. Having the biggest fraction of my wealth locked up in
one business seemed more and more dangerous, and it kept me from
experimenting and taking certain risks. If you want to keep running your
business without projecting your personal risk tolerance onto it, consider
the minority share sale or start investing your dividends in unrelated assets.
Keeping the business and growing it into an even bigger enterprise is
something that many founders who have been through it describe as an
intensely rewarding and incredibly taxing experience. The great thing about
increasing the value of your business every single day is that should you
ever decide to sell it, the amount of money you will walk away with is
growing as well. That motivation alone will make it worthwhile, and the
entrepreneurial experience you're amassing will guarantee that if you ever
want to do it again, you'll know exactly what to do.
BEYOND BOOTSTRAPPING
FINANCING FOR THE HESITANT: INVESTMENT
OPTIONS
I'm a big proponent of looking at things from multiple points of view. That
includes the central assumption we have made throughout this whole time:
that bootstrapping is the most desirable form of building a sustainable SaaS
business.
I still believe that to be true. Bootstrapping is a great way to build and
own a fantastic business. It's a great way to stay in control and retain all of
the value of your company. But it's not the only option.
Sometimes, financing can make a difference. Even though we never
took any money when we ran FeedbackPanda, I never considered it to be
wrong to imagine what would happen if we did. Funding is not the enemy
of a bootstrapper. A lot of people in the indie business sphere have spoken
very negatively about funding in the past, mostly due to the fact that
whenever people talked about funding, they were thinking of venture
capital. But this has changed. There are now a number of alternative ways
of injecting money into your business, and most of them don't involve
complicated ownership arrangements.
While makers and solopreneurs generally tend to avoid financing, there
are opportunities for external money to do great good. It's just a matter of
carefully weighing the pros and cons. There is wisdom in knowing what's
possible, even when you don't want to use it. If you decide to never take any
more, that's awesome. You'll learn how to create a business from nothing, a
truly bootstrapped company all the way. If you decide at some point that
you want some non-VC cash, you can do a lot of good without giving up
control of your business. Even if you choose to raise some serious venture
capital later down the road, that can be great. As long as your decision helps
you reach your goal instead of just copying the choices and actions of
others, it will be the right one.
As long as you're conducting your business with a focus on sustainable
growth, being smart and conservative in your use of available resources,
and forging long-term relationships with your customers, you are running a
bootstrapped business. After all, bootstrapping is the mindset of using
heavily constrained resources to their maximum potential.
That doesn't change if you get funding. Adding outside capital makes
your business a semi-bootstrapped business, provided you retain control
and ownership in the majority of the business, and your goals don't change
from slow, sustainable growth to hockey-stick hypergrowth. Bootstrapping
is about measured growth and realistic expectations.
The venture-capital-centric assumption that, if you burn through enough
cash, you will capture the whole market may work for aspiring unicorn
businesses who can spend hundreds of millions of dollars and not generate
a single cent in revenue. Throwing millions of dollars at a lot of companies
to see which one sticks makes sense if you expect the winners to
outperform the losers dramatically. But bootstrapped businesses are
different.
Several players in the market have understood that bootstrappers want
both funding and to remain a sustainable small-scale business. They
generally require the business to have clear validation, which is often called
"post-revenue": you need to make money from your business. What has
been a no-brainer for enterprises over the last few millennia now needs to
be made explicit in a time of hypergrowth ventures.
Accelerators and Incubators
TinySeed is an accelerator for early-stage SaaS founders, helping with a
cash injection and mentorship while focusing on a bootstrapping approach
at the same time. Since there are dozens of businesses in the same batch,
shared access to mentors and resources creates strong synergistic effects
between the businesses that are all at the same stage. It's a community of
founders, building their businesses together. This may even be more
important than the monetary component.
Be careful when joining conventional accelerators and incubators. Many
of them still operate intending to make you ready for the world of venture
capital. This could create severe misalignments between what you need as a
bootstrapper and what they think you should want. While getting money
and guidance is enticing, being "accelerated" wrongly will create a dynamic
of dependency and misalignment that can severely inhibit your future
prospects.
Earnings vs. Equity
Funds have been started that use Income Sharing Agreements instead of
shares to create returns from investment. Earnest Capital does this, and its
Shared Earnings Agreement is publicly available. Understanding that a
long-term profit-sharing relationship is more compatible with the
sustainable business processes of a bootstrapped business makes this kind
of agreement very interesting for founders who want to keep control and
benefit from external funds at the same time.
Similarly, some VCs such as Indie.vc wants to support founders on their
journey beyond initial profitability similarly. They take an initial percentage
of ownership, which can be redeemed through a portion of the monthly
revenue. Should you want to raise further money, the ownership will be
converted into traditional equity.
Traditional Sources of Funding
I recommend staying away from bank loans. Banks still live in the non-
digital past. They don't yet understand the world of SaaS businesses as well
as they know the numbers of farms or factories. They require a lot of
collateral, and have very rigid requirements like business plans and long-
term commitments that don't work in the fast-paced, pivot-focused world of
bootstrapping small SaaS companies. If you take a loan, you will likely be
personally impacted if the business doesn't work out, and that is both added
stress for you and a liability for the business.
And it's likely you won't get a loan in the first place. Many banks and
institutions won't invest in software businesses. You will have a lot of
conversations that end in, "We would love to, but we just don't give out
loans for these kinds of businesses." Very rarely will the attempt to secure
such a loan be worth your time. You'll be better off reaching out to the kinds
of investors that understand and prominently support bootstrapped
founders.
INTO THE THUNDERDOME: TAKING VENTURE
CAPITAL
Sometimes, companies that have been bootstrapped for years take a
seemingly surprising detour: they accept a large amount of venture capital
funding. Almost always, this is met with bewilderment and criticism, as it
was in the case of 1Password. There seems to be a common belief that once
you're bootstrapped, you have to be bootstrapped forever. Why is that?
The VC world has expectations and goals that are opposed to the idea of
bootstrapping a sustainable business: if you make a lot of risky bets, you
expect most of them to fail, and some of them to work out really well. This
requires a peculiar mindset on the side of the founders. They need to be
okay with failing spectacularly and risking everything to have a shot of
becoming the biggest, most radically expanding business they can be. At
the same time, profitability expectations are deferred until that point in the
future when the business is huge and has captured all that juicy market
share.
As a result, any business that is profitable but not explosively growing
is not worth much to a VC who is looking for the next unicorn. This is true
even in an economic downturn, as previous bets that won't work out still
need to be cushioned by the winning few. While recessions bring
profitability back into focus even for venture capitalists, the growth
expectations are still very much front and center.
That's why the community is very skeptical of bootstrapped businesses
taking on VC money after bootstrapping for many years. With a VC
investment, the expectations are "rocket ship or bust," and people fear that
the previously bootstrapped business won't be able to make the changes
needed to switch from slow, sustainable growth to hypergrowth.
But all of that is guesswork. And venture capital isn't a one-size-fits-all
investment vehicle. Most VC deals are made with the unique properties of
the bootstrapped businesses in mind, and no VC would invest their money
into something they couldn't envision having future success. The same goes
for the founders. They have spotted an opportunity to take their business
somewhere else, and they see venture capital as the means to get there. If
they were capable of bootstrapping their business to this point, who are we
to say that all of a sudden, their choice is a wrong one?
And in all honesty: if you own a business, you get to decide what to do
with it.
If you want to bootstrap forever, great.
If you want to get indie funding, wonderful.
If you want to take your business to another level and use VC funds for
that, that's good, too.
Many bootstrapped companies have gone the VC route, and they have
been successful with it. There is no point in expecting businesses to stay the
same over time. Every business needs to adjust to the reality of the market.
Being a bootstrapping purist won't make your business any better.
If you're contemplating taking VC money, just be aware of the potential
risks that come with investor expectations. Read about the experiences of
other founders, talk to them about the good and the bad, and make a
decision based on the experiences of their journeys.
CLOSING WORDS
Thank you for reading Zero to Sold. I've learned many of the lessons of this
book the hard way, and I share them in hopes of giving entrepreneurs some
insight into the reality of being a founder.
In all of my writing, I have always imagined my reader to be myself,
just five years ago. I've been writing for someone who always liked the idea
of starting their own business, who wanted to use their skills to empower
others. I wanted to build something to allow me to grow every single day
and find financial security through it.
That person from five years ago was an avid reader and consumer of
podcasts. I can only recommend the same for you: learn from those who are
in the thick of things as well as from those who are sharing their
experiences after the fact. Having both perspectives side by side will allow
you to judge how realistic advice is and how much bias comes with it. In
this book, I have tried to merge the experiential with the instructional, yet
for 
your 
specific 
situation, 
the 
advice 
may 
not 
fully 
apply.
Entrepreneurialism is also about choosing which advice you follow.
If you have found Zero to Sold helpful and instructive, please
recommend it to other founders or those you think should consider founding
a bootstrapped business.
I am grateful that you have read Zero to Sold, and I wish you the very
best for your own entrepreneurial journey.
Two Questions
I want to leave you with two questions. Both have proven to be thought-
provoking in my consulting and mentoring work. Ask yourself these
questions within the context of your entrepreneurial ideas, whenever you
wonder if the path you’re taking is the right one:
What life do I want to lead five years from now?
Visualize this life. Try to see yourself, your work, your daily routine.
Imagine where you are, what you do, how you feel, who and what you are
surrounding yourself with. Then look at the choice right in front of you and
ask:
What will give me traction toward this future state?
If it will get you there, start today. If it won’t, find something else, and
start with that.
The journey to successful entrepreneurship starts with a choice. It starts
with action.
NOW WHAT?
If you’d like more, head over to zerotosoldbook.com, where you will find
a large amount of resources and links that will help you continue your
journey from here.
Consider 
visiting 
The 
Bootstrapped 
Founder 
blog 
at
thebootstrappedfounder.com, where you can read my past, current, and
future articles. You can stay up-to-date on my writing by subscribing to the
Bootstrapped Founder 
Newsletter at thebootstrappedfounder.com/
newsletter. Finally, I publish new episodes of the Bootstrapped Founder
Podcast regularly at thebootstrappedfounder.com/podcast.
Now that you’ve finished the book, I would love to hear from you–after
all, I’ve been mentioning the word “feedback” over 40 times.
Please take a moment to rate and review Zero to Sold on Amazon,
Gumroad, and Goodreads.
Finally, please send any questions, corrections, comments, crushing
criticism 
or 
words 
of 
encouragement 
to
arvid@thebootstrappedfounder.com. Every email is truly appreciated.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Arvid Kahl is a software engineer, entrepreneur, and writer. He co-founded and bootstrapped
FeedbackPanda, an online teacher productivity SaaS company, with his partner Danielle Simpson.
They sold the business for a life-changing amount of money in 2019, two years after founding the
company.
He writes on TheBootstrappedFounder.com to share his experience with bootstrapping as a
desirable, value- and wealth-generating way of running a company.
In the years of running FeedbackPanda (and throughout the many failed attempts before that),
Arvid learned how to run a self-funded company. He learned that not every business needs venture
capital to succeed, and Arvid claims that most businesses are better off without it.
He wants to encourage other entrepreneurs to see bootstrapping as a viable option.
 
Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. 
 
Official Telegram channel 
 
Z-Access 
 
https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library
z-library.sk              z-lib.gs                  z-lib.fm              go-to-library.sk
This file was downloaded from Z-Library project
